---
title: Structure of This Book
---

<h3>Structure of This Book</h3>
<p>We start by covering the basics of the language and the library together in <a href="019-part_i_the_basics.html#filepos278698">Parts I</a> and <a href="081-part_ii_the_cpp_library.html#filepos2066884">II</a>. These parts cover enough material to let you, the reader, write significant programs. Most C++ programmers need to know essentially everything covered in this portion of the book.</p>
<p>In addition to teaching the basics of C++, the material in <a href="019-part_i_the_basics.html#filepos278698">Parts I</a> and <a href="081-part_ii_the_cpp_library.html#filepos2066884">II</a> serves another important purpose: By using the abstract facilities defined by the library, you will become more comfortable with using high-level programming techniques. The library facilities are themselves abstract data types that are usually written in C++. The library can be defined using the same class-construction features that are available to any C++ programmer. Our experience in teaching C++ is that by first using well-designed abstract types, readers find it easier to understand how to build their own types.</p>
<p>Only after a thorough grounding in using the library—and writing the kinds of abstract programs that the library allows—do we move on to those C++ features that will enable you to write your own abstractions. <a href="119-part_iii_tools_for_class_authors.html#filepos3192626">Parts III</a> and <a href="161-part_iv_advanced_topics.html#filepos4558192">IV</a> focus on writing abstractions in the form of classes. <a href="119-part_iii_tools_for_class_authors.html#filepos3192626">Part III</a> covers the fundamentals; <a href="161-part_iv_advanced_topics.html#filepos4558192">Part IV</a> covers more specialized facilities.</p>
<p>In <a href="119-part_iii_tools_for_class_authors.html#filepos3192626">Part III</a>, we cover issues of copy control, along with other techniques to make classes that are as easy to use as the built-in types. Classes are the foundation for object-oriented and generic programming, which we also cover in <a href="119-part_iii_tools_for_class_authors.html#filepos3192626">Part III</a>. <em>C++ Primer</em> concludes with <a href="161-part_iv_advanced_topics.html#filepos4558192">Part IV</a>, which covers features that are of most use in structuring large, complicated systems. We also summarize the library algorithms in <a href="187-appendix_a._the_library.html#filepos5411866">Appendix A</a>.</p>
