<h3 id="filepos136281">1.2. A First Look at Input/Output</h3>
<p>The C++ language does not define any statements to do input or output (IO). Instead, C++ includes an extensive <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos267297" id="filepos136536">standard library</a></strong> that provides IO (and many other facilities). For many purposes, including the examples in this book, one needs to know only a few basic concepts and operations from the IO library.</p>
<p>Most of the examples in this book use the <code>iostream</code> library. Fundamental to the <code>iostream</code> library are two types named <code>istream</code> and <code>ostream</code>, which represent input and output streams, respectively. A stream is a sequence of characters read from or written to an IO device. The term <em>stream</em> is intended to suggest that the characters are generated, or consumed, sequentially over time.</p>
<h4><a id="filepos137881"></a>Standard Input and Output Objects</h4>
<p>The library defines four IO objects. To handle input, we use an object of type <code>istream</code> named <code>cin</code> (pronounced <em>see-in</em>). This object is also referred to as the <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos267042" id="filepos138401">standard input</a></strong>. For output, we use an <code>ostream</code> object named <code>cout</code> (pronounced <em>see-out</em>). This object is also known as the <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos267962" id="filepos138826">standard output</a></strong>. The library also defines two other <code>ostream</code> objects, named <code>cerr</code> and <code>clog</code> (pronounced <em>see-err</em> and <em>see-log</em>, respectively). We typically use <code>cerr</code>, referred to as the <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos266714" id="filepos139556">standard error</a></strong>, for warning and error messages and <code>clog</code> for general information about the execution of the program.</p>
<p>Ordinarily, the system associates each of these objects with the window in which the program is executed. So, when we read from <code>cin</code>, data are read from the window in which the program is executing, and when we write to <code>cout</code>, <code>cerr</code>, or <code>clog</code>, the output is written to the same window.</p>
<h4>A Program That Uses the IO Library</h4>
<p>In our bookstore problem, we’ll have several records that we’ll want to combine into a single total. As a simpler, related problem, let’s look first at how we might add two numbers. Using the IO library, we can extend our <code>main</code> program to prompt the user to give us two numbers and then print their sum:</p>

```c++
#include <iostream>
int main()
{
    std::cout << "Enter two numbers:" << std::endl;
    int v1 = 0, v2 = 0;
    std::cin >> v1 >> v2;
    std::cout << "The sum of " << v1 << " and " << v2
              << " is " << v1 + v2 << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```

<p>This program starts by printing</p>

```c++
Enter two numbers:
```

<p>on the user’s screen and then waits for input from the user. If the user enters</p>

```c++
3 7
```

<p>followed by a newline, then the program produces the following output:</p>

```c++
The sum of 3 and 7 is 10
```

<p>The first line of our program</p>

```c++
#include <iostream>
```

<p>tells the compiler that we want to use the <code>iostream</code> library. The name inside angle brackets (<code>iostream</code> in this case) refers to a <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos262368" id="filepos143359">header</a></strong>. Every program that uses a library facility must include its associated header. The <code>#include</code> directive <a id="filepos143585"></a>must be written on a single line—the name of the header and the <code>#include</code> must appear on the same line. In general, <code>#include</code> directives must appear outside any function. Typically, we put all the <code>#include</code> directives for a program at the beginning of the source file.</p>
<h4>Writing to a Stream</h4>
<p>The first statement in the body of <code>main</code> executes an <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos260662" id="filepos144324">expression</a></strong>. In C++ an expression yields a result and is composed of one or more operands and (usually) an operator. The expressions in this statement use the output operator (the <code>«</code>
<strong>operator</strong>) to print a message on the standard output:</p>

```c++
std::cout << "Enter two numbers:" << std::endl;
```

<p>The <code>&lt;&lt;</code> operator takes two operands: The left-hand operand must be an <code>ostream</code> object; the right-hand operand is a value to print. The operator writes the given value on the given <code>ostream</code>. The result of the output operator is its left-hand operand. That is, the result is the <code>ostream</code> on which we wrote the given value.</p>
<p>Our output statement uses the <code>&lt;&lt;</code> operator twice. Because the operator returns its left-hand operand, the result of the first operator becomes the left-hand operand of the second. As a result, we can chain together output requests. Thus, our expression is equivalent to</p>

```c++
(std::cout << "Enter two numbers:") << std::endl;
```

<p>Each operator in the chain has the same object as its left-hand operand, in this case <code>std::cout</code>. Alternatively, we can generate the same output using two statements:</p>

```c++
std::cout << "Enter two numbers:";
std::cout << std::endl;
```

<p>The first output operator prints a message to the user. That message is a <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos269356" id="filepos147298">string literal</a></strong>, which is a sequence of characters enclosed in double quotation marks. The text between the quotation marks is printed to the standard output.</p>
<p>The second operator prints <code>endl</code>, which is a special value called a <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos264529" id="filepos147711">manipulator</a></strong>. Writing <code>endl</code> has the effect of ending the current line and flushing the <em><strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos255088" id="filepos147924">buffer</a></strong></em> associated with that device. Flushing the buffer ensures that all the output the program has generated so far is actually written to the output stream, rather than sitting in memory waiting to be written.</p>

::: warning
<p>Warning</p>
<p>Programmers often add print statements during debugging. Such statements should <em>always</em> flush the stream. Otherwise, if the program crashes, output may be left in the buffer, leading to incorrect inferences about where the program crashed.</p>
:::

<h4>Using Names from the Standard Library</h4>
<p>Careful readers will note that this program uses <code>std::cout</code> and <code>std::endl</code> rather than just <code>cout</code> and <code>endl</code>. The prefix <code>std::</code> indicates that the names <code>cout</code> and <code>endl</code> are defined inside the <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos265339" id="filepos149573">namespace</a></strong> named <code>std</code>. Namespaces allow us to <a id="filepos149843"></a>avoid inadvertent collisions between the names we define and uses of those same names inside a library. All the names defined by the standard library are in the <code>std</code> namespace.</p>
<p>One side effect of the library’s use of a namespace is that when we use a name from the library, we must say explicitly that we want to use the name from the <code>std</code> namespace. Writing <code>std::cout</code> uses the scope operator (the <a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos272932" id="filepos150506"><code>::</code>
<strong>operator</strong></a>) to say that we want to use the name <code>cout</code> that is defined in the namespace <code>std</code>. § <a href="030-3.1._namespace_using_declarations.html#filepos638596">3.1</a> (p. <a href="030-3.1._namespace_using_declarations.html#filepos638596">82</a>) will show a simpler way to access names from the library.</p>
<h4>Reading from a Stream</h4>
<p>Having asked the user for input, we next want to read that input. We start by defining two <em><strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos270220" id="filepos151299">variables</a></strong></em> named <code>v1</code> and <code>v2</code> to hold the input:</p>

```c++
int v1 = 0, v2 = 0;
```

<p>We define these variables as type <code>int</code>, which is a built-in type representing integers. We also <em><strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos263223" id="filepos151916">initialize</a></strong></em> them to <code>0</code>. When we initialize a variable, we give it the indicated value at the same time as the variable is created.</p>
<p>The next statement</p>

```c++
std::cin >> v1 >> v2;
```

<p>reads the input. The input operator (the <code>»</code>
<strong>operator</strong>) behaves analogously to the output operator. It takes an <code>istream</code> as its left-hand operand and an object as its right-hand operand. It reads data from the given <code>istream</code> and stores what was read in the given object. Like the output operator, the input operator returns its left-hand operand as its result. Hence, this expression is equivalent to</p>

```c++
(std::cin >> v1) >> v2;
```

<p>Because the operator returns its left-hand operand, we can combine a sequence of input requests into a single statement. Our input operation reads two values from <code>std::cin</code>, storing the first in <code>v1</code> and the second in <code>v2</code>. In other words, our input operation executes as</p>

```c++
std::cin >> v1;
std::cin >> v2;
```

<h4>Completing the Program</h4>
<p>What remains is to print our result:</p>

```c++
std::cout << "The sum of " << v1 << " and " << v2
          << " is " << v1 + v2 << std::endl;
```

<p>This statement, although longer than the one that prompted the user for input, is conceptually similar. It prints each of its operands on the standard output. What is interesting in this example is that the operands are not all the same kinds of values. Some operands are string literals, such as <code>"The sum of "</code>. Others are <code>int</code> values, such as <code>v1</code>, <code>v2</code>, and the result of evaluating the arithmetic expression <code>v1 + v2</code>. The library defines versions of the input and output operators that handle operands of each of these differing types.</p>

::: info
<a id="filepos155658"></a><p>Exercises Section 1.2</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.3:</strong> Write a program to print <code>Hello, World</code> on the standard output.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.4:</strong> Our program used the addition operator, <code>+</code>, to add two numbers. Write a program that uses the multiplication operator, <code>*</code>, to print the product instead.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.5:</strong> We wrote the output in one large statement. Rewrite the program to use a separate statement to print each operand.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.6:</strong> Explain whether the following program fragment is legal.</p>

```c++
std::cout << "The sum of " << v1;
          << " and " << v2;
          << " is " << v1 + v2 << std::endl;
```

<p>If the program is legal, what does it do? If the program is not legal, why not? How would you fix it?</p>
:::
