<h3 id="filepos157648">1.3. A Word about Comments</h3>
<p>Before our programs get much more complicated, we should see how C++ handles <em><strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos258247" id="filepos157866">comments</a></strong></em>. Comments help the human readers of our programs. They are typically used to summarize an algorithm, identify the purpose of a variable, or clarify an otherwise obscure segment of code. The compiler ignores comments, so they have no effect on the program’s behavior or performance.</p>
<p>Although the compiler ignores comments, readers of our code do not. Programmers tend to believe comments even when other parts of the system documentation are out of date. An incorrect comment is worse than no comment at all because it may mislead the reader. When you change your code, be sure to update the comments, too!</p>
<h4>Kinds of Comments in C++</h4>
<p>There are two kinds of comments in C++: single-line and paired. A single-line comment starts with a double slash (<code>//</code>) and ends with a newline. Everything to the right of the slashes on the current line is ignored by the compiler. A comment of this kind can contain any text, including additional double slashes.</p>
<p>The other kind of comment uses two delimiters (<code>/*</code> and <code>*/</code>) that are inherited from C. Such comments begin with a <code>/*</code> and end with the next <code>*/</code>. These comments can include anything that is not a <code>*/</code>, including newlines. The compiler treats everything that falls between the <code>/*</code> and <code>*/</code> as part of the comment.</p>
<p>A comment pair can be placed anywhere a tab, space, or newline is permitted. Comment pairs can span multiple lines of a program but are not required to do so. When a comment pair does span multiple lines, it is often a good idea to indicate visually that the inner lines are part of a multiline comment. Our style is to begin each line in the comment with an asterisk, thus indicating that the entire range is part of a multiline comment.</p>
<p>Programs typically contain a mixture of both comment forms. Comment pairs generally are used for multiline explanations, whereas double-slash comments tend to be used for half-line and single-line remarks:</p>

```c++
#include <iostream>
/*
 * Simple main function:
 * Read two numbers and write their sum
 */
int main()
{
    // prompt user to enter two numbers
    std::cout << "Enter two numbers:" << std::endl;
    int v1 = 0, v2 = 0;   // variables to hold the input we read
    std::cin >> v1 >> v2; // read input
    std::cout << "The sum of " << v1 << " and " << v2
              << " is " << v1 + v2 << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```

::: info
<p>In this book, we italicize comments to make them stand out from the normal program text. In actual programs, whether comment text is distinguished from the text used for program code depends on the sophistication of the programming environment you are using.</p>
:::

<h4>Comment Pairs Do Not Nest</h4>
<p>A comment that begins with <code>/*</code> ends with the next <code>*/</code>. As a result, one comment pair cannot appear inside another. The compiler error messages that result from this kind of mistake can be mysterious and confusing. As an example, compile the following program on your system:</p>

```c++
/*
 * comment pairs /*   */ cannot nest.
 * ''cannot nest'' is considered source code,
 * as is the rest of the program
 */
int main()
{
    return 0;
}
```

<p>We often need to comment out a block of code during debugging. Because that code might contain nested comment pairs, the best way to comment a block of code is to insert single-line comments at the beginning of each line in the section we want to ignore:</p>

```c++
// /*
// * everything inside a single-line comment is ignored
// * including nested comment pairs
//  */
```

::: info
<a id="filepos164930"></a><p>Exercises Section 1.3</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.7:</strong> Compile a program that has incorrectly nested comments.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.8:</strong> Indicate which, if any, of the following output statements are legal:</p>

```c++
std::cout << "/*";
std::cout << "*/";
std::cout << /* "*/" */;
std::cout << /*  "*/" /* "/*"  */;
```

<p>After you’ve predicted what will happen, test your answers by compiling a program with each of these statements. Correct any errors you encounter.</p>
:::
