---
title: 1.4. Flow of Control
---

<h3 id="filepos166172">1.4. Flow of Control</h3>
<p>Statements normally execute sequentially: The first statement in a block is executed first, followed by the second, and so on. Of course, few programs—including the one to solve our bookstore problem—can be written using only sequential execution. Instead, programming languages provide various flow-of-control statements that allow for more complicated execution paths.</p>
<h4 id="filepos166704">1.4.1. The <code>while</code> Statement</h4>
<p>A <a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos270406" id="filepos166963"><code>while</code>
<strong>statement</strong></a> repeatedly executes a section of code so long as a given condition is true. We can use a <code>while</code> to write a program to sum the numbers from 1 through 10 inclusive as follows:</p>

```c++
#include <iostream>
int main()
{
    int sum = 0, val  = 1;
    // keep executing the while as long as val is less than or equal to 10
    while (val <= 10)  {
        sum += val;   // assigns sum + val to sum
        ++val;        // add 1 to val
    }
    std::cout << "Sum of 1 to 10 inclusive is "
              << sum << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```

<p>When we compile and execute this program, it prints</p>

```
Sum of 1 to 10 inclusive is 55
```

<p>As before, we start by including the <code>iostream</code> header and defining <code>main</code>. Inside <code>main</code> we define two <code>int</code> variables: <code>sum</code>, which will hold our summation, and <code>val</code>, which will represent each of the values from 1 through 10. We give <code>sum</code> an initial value of <code>0</code> and start <code>val</code> off with the value <code>1</code>.</p>
<p><a id="filepos170706"></a>The new part of this program is the <code>while</code> statement. A <code>while</code> has the form</p>

```c++
while (condition)
    statement
```

<p>A <code>while</code> executes by (alternately) testing the <em>condition</em> and executing the associated <em>statement</em> until the <em>condition</em> is false. A <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos258940" id="filepos171519">condition</a></strong> is an expression that yields a result that is either true or false. So long as <em>condition</em> is true, <em>statement</em> is executed. After executing <em>statement</em>, <em>condition</em> is tested again. If <em>condition</em> is again true, then <em>statement</em> is again executed. The <code>while</code> continues, alternately testing the <em>condition</em> and executing <em>statement</em> until the <em>condition</em> is false.</p>
<p>In this program, the <code>while</code> statement is</p>

```c++
// keep executing the while as long as val is less than or equal to 10
while (val <= 10)  {
    sum += val;   // assigns sum + val to sum
    ++val;        // add 1 to val
}
```

<p>The condition uses the less-than-or-equal operator (the <a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos277200" id="filepos173855"><code>&lt;=</code>
<strong>operator</strong></a>) to compare the current value of <code>val</code> and <code>10</code>. As long as <code>val</code> is less than or equal to 10, the condition is true. If the condition is true, we execute the body of the <code>while</code>. In this case, that body is a block with two statements:</p>

```c++
{
    sum += val;  // assigns sum + val to sum
    ++val;       // add 1 to val
}
```

<p>A block is a sequence of zero or more statements enclosed by curly braces. A block is a statement and may be used wherever a statement is required. The first statement in this block uses the compound assignment operator (the <a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos271889" id="filepos175818"><code>+=</code>
<strong>operator</strong></a>). This operator adds its right-hand operand to its left-hand operand and stores the result in the left-hand operand. It has essentially the same effect as writing an addition and an <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos254605" id="filepos176210">assignment</a></strong>:</p>

```c++
sum = sum + val; // assign sum + val to sum
```

<p>Thus, the first statement in the block adds the value of <code>val</code> to the current value of <code>sum</code> and stores the result back into <code>sum</code>.</p>
<p>The next statement</p>

```c++
++val;     // add 1 to val
```

<p>uses the prefix increment operator (the <a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos271323" id="filepos177745"><code>++</code>
<strong>operator</strong></a>). The increment operator adds <code>1</code> to its operand. Writing <code>++val</code> is the same as writing <code>val = val + 1</code>.</p>
<p>After executing the <code>while</code> body, the loop evaluates the condition again. If the (now incremented) value of <code>val</code> is still less than or equal to 10, then the body of the <code>while</code> is executed again. The loop continues, testing the condition and executing the body, until <code>val</code> is no longer less than or equal to 10.</p>
<p>Once <code>val</code> is greater than 10, the program falls out of the <code>while</code> loop and continues execution with the statement following the <code>while</code>. In this case, that statement prints our output, followed by the <code>return</code>, which completes our <code>main</code> program.</p>

::: info
<a id="filepos179531"></a><p>Exercises Section 1.4.1</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.9:</strong> Write a program that uses a <code>while</code> to sum the numbers from 50 to 100.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.10:</strong> In addition to the <code>++</code> operator that adds <code>1</code> to its operand, there is a decrement operator (<code>--</code>) that subtracts <code>1</code>. Use the decrement operator to write a <code>while</code> that prints the numbers from ten down to zero.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.11:</strong> Write a program that prompts the user for two integers. Print each number in the range specified by those two integers.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos180866">1.4.2. The <code>for</code> Statement</h4>
<p>In our <code>while</code> loop we used the variable <code>val</code> to control how many times we executed the loop. We tested the value of <code>val</code> in the condition and incremented <code>val</code> in the <code>while</code> body.</p>
<p>This pattern—using a variable in a condition and incrementing that variable in the body—happens so often that the language defines a second statement, the <a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos261422" id="filepos181841"><code>for</code>
<strong>statement</strong></a>, that abbreviates code that follows this pattern. We can rewrite this program using a <code>for</code> loop to sum the numbers from 1 through 10 as follows:</p>

```c++
#include <iostream>
int main()
{
    int sum = 0;
    // sum values from 1 through 10 inclusive
    for (int val = 1; val <= 10; ++val)
        sum += val;  // equivalent to sum = sum + val
    std::cout << "Sum of 1 to 10 inclusive is "
              << sum << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```

<p>As before, we define <code>sum</code> and initialize it to zero. In this version, we define <code>val</code> as part of the <code>for</code> statement itself:</p>

```c++
for (int val = 1; val <= 10; ++val)
    sum += val;
```

<p>Each <code>for</code> statement has two parts: a header and a body. The header controls how often the body is executed. The header itself consists of three parts: an <em>init-statement</em>, a <em>condition</em>, and an <em>expression</em>. In this case, the <em>init-statement</em></p>

```c++
int val = 1;
```

<p>defines an <code>int</code> object named <code>val</code> and gives it an initial value of <code>1</code>. The variable <code>val</code> exists only inside the <code>for</code>; it is not possible to use <code>val</code> after this loop terminates. The <em>init-statement</em> is executed only once, on entry to the <code>for</code>. The <em>condition</em></p>

```c++
val <= 10
```

<p>compares the current value in <code>val</code> to <code>10</code>. The <em>condition</em> is tested each time through the loop. As long as <code>val</code> is less than or equal to <code>10</code>, we execute the <code>for</code> body. The <em>expression</em> is executed after the <code>for</code> body. Here, the <em>expression</em></p>

```c++
++val
```

<p>uses the prefix increment operator, which adds <code>1</code> to the value of <code>val</code>. After executing the <em>expression</em>, the <code>for</code> retests the <em>condition</em>. If the new value of <code>val</code> is still less than or equal to <code>10</code>, then the <code>for</code> loop body is executed again. After executing the body, <code>val</code> is incremented again. The loop continues until the <em>condition</em> fails.</p>
<p>In this loop, the <code>for</code> body performs the summation</p>

```c++
sum += val; // equivalent to sum = sum + val
```

<p>To recap, the overall execution flow of this <code>for</code> is:</p>
<ol>
    <li>Create <code>val</code> and initialize it to <code>1</code>.</li>
    <li>Test whether <code>val</code> is less than or equal to <code>10</code>. If the test succeeds, execute the <code>for</code> body. If the test fails, exit the loop and continue execution with the first statement following the <code>for</code> body.</li>
    <li>Increment <code>val</code>.</li>
    <li>Repeat the test in step 2, continuing with the remaining steps as long as the condition is true.</li>
</ol>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 1.4.2</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.12:</strong> What does the following <code>for</code> loop do? What is the final value of <code>sum</code>?</p>

```c++
int sum = 0;
for (int i = -100; i <= 100; ++i)
    sum += i;
```

<p><strong>Exercise 1.13:</strong> Rewrite the exercises from § <a href="014-1.4._flow_of_control.html#filepos166704">1.4.1</a> (p. <a href="014-1.4._flow_of_control.html#filepos166704">13</a>) using <code>for</code> loops.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.14:</strong> Compare and contrast the loops that used a <code>for</code> with those using a <code>while</code>. Are there advantages or disadvantages to using either form?</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.15:</strong> Write programs that contain the common errors discussed in the box on page <a href="014-1.4._flow_of_control.html#filepos197678">16</a>. Familiarize yourself with the messages the compiler generates.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos191453">1.4.3. Reading an Unknown Number of Inputs</h4>
<p>In the preceding sections, we wrote programs that summed the numbers from 1 through 10. A logical extension of this program would be to ask the user to input a set of numbers to sum. In this case, we won’t know how many numbers to add. Instead, we’ll keep reading numbers until there are no more numbers to read:</p>
<p><a id="filepos191990"></a></p>

```c++
#include <iostream>
int main()
{
    int sum = 0, value = 0;
    // read until end-of-file, calculating a running total of all values read
    while (std::cin >> value)
        sum += value; // equivalent to sum = sum + value
    std::cout << "Sum is: " << sum << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```

<p>If we give this program the input</p>

```
3 4 5 6
```

<p>then our output will be</p>

```
Sum is: 18
```

<p>The first line inside <code>main</code> defines two <code>int</code> variables, named <code>sum</code> and <code>value</code>, which we initialize to <code>0</code>. We’ll use <code>value</code> to hold each number as we read it from the input. We read the data inside the condition of the <code>while</code>:</p>

```c++
while (std::cin >> value)
```

<p>Evaluating the <code>while</code> condition executes the expression</p>

```c++
std::cin >> value
```

<p>That expression reads the next number from the standard input and stores that number in <code>value</code>. The input operator (§ <a href="012-1.2._a_first_look_at_inputoutput.html#filepos136281">1.2</a>, p. <a href="012-1.2._a_first_look_at_inputoutput.html#filepos136281">8</a>) returns its left operand, which in this case is <code>std::cin</code>. This condition, therefore, tests <code>std::cin</code>.</p>
<p>When we use an <code>istream</code> as a condition, the effect is to test the state of the stream. If the stream is valid—that is, if the stream hasn’t encountered an error—then the test succeeds. An <code>istream</code> becomes invalid when we hit <em><strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos260404" id="filepos195735">end-of-file</a></strong></em> or encounter an invalid input, such as reading a value that is not an integer. An <code>istream</code> that is in an invalid state will cause the condition to yield false.</p>
<p>Thus, our <code>while</code> executes until we encounter end-of-file (or an input error). The <code>while</code> body uses the compound assignment operator to add the current value to the evolving <code>sum</code>. Once the condition fails, the <code>while</code> ends. We fall through and execute the next statement, which prints the <code>sum</code> followed by <code>endl</code>.</p>

::: info
<p>Entering an End-of-File from the Keyboard</p>
<p>When we enter input to a program from the keyboard, different operating systems use different conventions to allow us to indicate end-of-file. On Windows systems we enter an end-of-file by typing a control-z—hold down the Ctrl key and press <code>z</code>—followed by hitting either the Enter or Return key. On UNIX systems, including on Mac OS X machines, end-of-file is usually control-d.</p>
:::

::: info
<a id="filepos197678"></a><p>Compilation Revisited</p>
<p>Part of the compiler’s job is to look for errors in the program text. A compiler cannot detect whether a program does what its author intends, but it can detect errors in the <em>form</em> of the program. The following are the most common kinds of errors a compiler will detect.</p>
<p><em>Syntax errors:</em> The programmer has made a grammatical error in the C++ language. The following program illustrates common syntax errors; each comment describes the error on the following line:</p>

```c++
// error: missing ) in parameter list for main
int main ( {
    // error: used colon, not a semicolon, after endl
    std::cout << "Read each file." << std::endl:
    // error: missing quotes around string literal
    std::cout << Update master. << std::endl;
    // error: second output operator is missing
    std::cout << "Write new master." std::endl;
    // error: missing ; on return statement
    return 0
}
```

<p><em>Type errors:</em> Each item of data in C++ has an associated type. The value 10, for example, has a type of <code>int</code> (or, more colloquially, “is an <code>int</code>”). The word <code>"hello"</code>, including the double quotation marks, is a string literal. One example of a type error is passing a string literal to a function that expects an <code>int</code> argument.</p>
<p><em>Declaration errors:</em> Every name used in a C++ program must be declared before it is used. Failure to declare a name usually results in an error message. The two most common declaration errors are forgetting to use <code>std::</code> for a name from the library and misspelling the name of an identifier:</p>

```c++
#include <iostream>
int main()
{
    int v1 = 0, v2 = 0;
    std::cin >> v >> v2; // error: uses "v" not "v1"
    // error: cout not defined; should be std::cout
    cout << v1 + v2 << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```

<p>Error messages usually contain a line number and a brief description of what the compiler believes we have done wrong. It is a good practice to correct errors in the sequence they are reported. Often a single error can have a cascading effect and cause a compiler to report more errors than actually are present. It is also a good idea to recompile the code after each fix—or after making at most a small number of obvious fixes. This cycle is known as <em><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos260170" id="filepos202754">edit-compile-debug</a></em>.</p>
:::

::: info
<a id="filepos202939"></a><p>Exercises Section 1.4.3</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.16:</strong> Write your own version of a program that prints the sum of a set of integers read from <code>cin</code>.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos203410">1.4.4. The <code>if</code> Statement</h4>
<p>Like most languages, C++ provides an <a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos262754" id="filepos203701"><code>if</code>
<strong>statement</strong></a> that supports conditional execution. We can use an <code>if</code> to write a program to count how many consecutive times each distinct value appears in the input:</p>

```c++
#include <iostream>
int main()
{
    // currVal is the number we're counting; we'll read new values into val
    int currVal = 0, val = 0;
    // read first number and ensure that we have data to process
    if (std::cin >> currVal) {
        int cnt = 1;  // store the count for the current value we're processing
        while (std::cin >> val) { // read the remaining numbers
            if (val == currVal)   // if the values are the same
                ++cnt;            // add 1 to cnt
            else { // otherwise, print the count for the previous value
                std::cout << currVal << " occurs "
                          << cnt << " times" << std::endl;
                currVal = val;    // remember the new value
                cnt = 1;          // reset the counter
            }
        }  // while loop ends here
        // remember to print the count for the last value in the file
        std::cout << currVal <<  " occurs "
                  << cnt << " times" << std::endl;
    } // outermost if statement ends here
    return 0;
}
```

<p>If we give this program the following input:</p>

```
42 42 42 42 42 55 55 62 100 100 100
```

<p>then the output should be</p>

```
42 occurs 5 times
55 occurs 2 times
62 occurs 1 times
100 occurs 3 times
```

<p>Much of the code in this program should be familiar from our earlier programs. We start by defining <code>val</code> and <code>currVal</code>: <code>currVal</code> will keep track of which number we are counting; <code>val</code> will hold each number as we read it from the input. What’s new are the two <code>if</code> statements. The first <code>if</code></p>
<p><a id="filepos210009"></a></p>

```c++
if (std::cin >> currVal) {
    // ...
} // outermost if statement ends here
```

<p>ensures that the input is not empty. Like a <code>while</code>, an <code>if</code> evaluates a condition. The condition in the first <code>if</code> reads a value into <code>currVal</code>. If the read succeeds, then the condition is true and we execute the block that starts with the open curly following the condition. That block ends with the close curly just before the <code>return</code> statement.</p>
<p>Once we know there are numbers to count, we define <code>cnt</code>, which will count how often each distinct number occurs. We use a <code>while</code> loop similar to the one in the previous section to (repeatedly) read numbers from the standard input.</p>
<p>The body of the <code>while</code> is a block that contains the second <code>if</code> statement:</p>

```c++
if (val == currVal)   // if the values are the same
    ++cnt;            // add 1 to cnt
else { // otherwise, print the count for the previous value
    std::cout << currVal << " occurs "
              << cnt << " times" << std::endl;
    currVal = val;    // remember the new value
    cnt = 1;          // reset the counter
}
```

<p>The condition in this <code>if</code> uses the equality operator (the <a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos276437" id="filepos213605"><code>==</code>
<strong>operator</strong></a>) to test whether <code>val</code> is equal to <code>currVal</code>. If so, we execute the statement that immediately follows the condition. That statement increments <code>cnt</code>, indicating that we have seen <code>currVal</code> once more.</p>
<p>If the condition is false—that is, if <code>val</code> is not equal to <code>currVal</code>—then we execute the statement following the <code>else</code>. This statement is a block consisting of an output statement and two assignments. The output statement prints the count for the value we just finished processing. The assignments reset <code>cnt</code> to <code>1</code> and <code>currVal</code> to <code>val</code>, which is the number we just read.</p>

::: warning
<p>C++ uses <code>=</code> for assignment and <code>==</code> for equality. Both operators can appear inside a condition. It is a common mistake to write <code>=</code> when you mean <code>==</code> inside a condition.</p>
:::

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 1.4.4</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.17:</strong> What happens in the program presented in this section if the input values are all equal? What if there are no duplicated values?</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.18:</strong> Compile and run the program from this section giving it only equal values as input. Run it again giving it values in which no number is repeated.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.19:</strong> Revise the program you wrote for the exercises in § <a href="014-1.4._flow_of_control.html#filepos166704">1.4.1</a> (p. <a href="014-1.4._flow_of_control.html#filepos166704">13</a>) that printed a range of numbers so that it handles input in which the first number is smaller than the second.</p>
:::

::: info
<a id="filepos217066"></a><p>Key Concept: Indentation and Formatting of C++ Programs</p>
<p>C++ programs are largely free-format, meaning that where we put curly braces, indentation, comments, and newlines usually has no effect on what our programs mean. For example, the curly brace that denotes the beginning of the body of <code>main</code> could be on the same line as <code>main</code>; positioned as we have done, at the beginning of the next line; or placed anywhere else we’d like. The only requirement is that the open curly must be the first nonblank, noncomment character following <code>main</code>’s parameter list.</p>
<p>Although we are largely free to format programs as we wish, the choices we make affect the readability of our programs. We could, for example, have written <code>main</code> on a single long line. Such a definition, although legal, would be hard to read.</p>
<p>Endless debates occur as to the right way to format C or C++ programs. Our belief is that there is no single correct style but that there is value in consistency. Most programmers indent subsidiary parts of their programs, as we’ve done with the statements inside <code>main</code> and the bodies of our loops. We tend to put the curly braces that delimit functions on their own lines. We also indent compound IO expressions so that the operators line up. Other indentation conventions will become clear as our programs become more sophisticated.</p>
<p>The important thing to keep in mind is that other ways to format programs are possible. When you choose a formatting style, think about how it affects readability and comprehension. Once you’ve chosen a style, use it consistently.</p>
:::
