<h3 id="filepos219539">1.5. Introducing Classes</h3>
<p>The only remaining feature we need to understand before solving our bookstore problem is how to define a <em><strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos259938" id="filepos219783">data structure</a></strong></em> to represent our transaction data. In C++ we define our own data structures by defining a <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos257067" id="filepos219954">class</a></strong>. A class defines a type along with a collection of operations that are related to that type. The class mechanism is one of the most important features in C++. In fact, a primary focus of the design of C++ is to make it possible to define <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos257558" id="filepos220259">class types</a></strong> that behave as naturally as the built-in types.</p>
<p>In this section, we’ll describe a simple class that we can use in writing our bookstore program. We’ll implement this class in later chapters as we learn more about types, expressions, statements, and functions.</p>
<p>To use a class we need to know three things:</p>
<ul><li>What is its name?</li><li>Where is it defined?</li><li>What operations does it support?</li></ul>

<p>For our bookstore problem, we’ll assume that the class is named <code>Sales_item</code> and that it is already defined in a header named <code>Sales_item.h</code>.</p>
<p>As we’ve seen, to use a library facility, we must include the associated header. Similarly, we use headers to access classes defined for our own applications. Conventionally, header file names are derived from the name of a class defined in that header. Header files that we write usually have a suffix of <code>.h</code>, but some programmers use <code>.H</code>, <code>.hpp</code>, or <code>.hxx</code>. The standard library headers typically have no suffix <a id="filepos222198"></a>at all. Compilers usually don’t care about the form of header file names, but IDEs sometimes do.</p>
<h4 id="filepos222335">1.5.1. The <code>Sales_item</code> Class</h4>
<p>The purpose of the <code>Sales_item</code> class is to represent the total revenue, number of copies sold, and average sales price for a book. How these data are stored or computed is not our concern. To use a class, we need not care about how it is implemented. Instead, what we need to know is what operations objects of that type can perform.</p>
<p>Every class defines a type. The type name is the same as the name of the class. Hence, our <code>Sales_item</code> class defines a type named <code>Sales_item</code>. As with the built-in types, we can define a variable of a class type. When we write</p>

```c++
Sales_item item;
```

<p>we are saying that <code>item</code> is an object of type <code>Sales_item</code>. We often contract the phrase “an object of type <code>Sales_item</code>” to “a <code>Sales_item</code> object” or even more simply to “a <code>Sales_item</code>.”</p>
<p>In addition to being able to define variables of type <code>Sales_item</code>, we can:</p>
<ul><li>Call a function named <code>isbn</code> to fetch the <small>ISBN</small> from a <code>Sales_item</code> object.</li><li>Use the input (<code>&gt;&gt;</code>) and output (<code>&lt;&lt;</code>) operators to read and write objects of type <code>Sales_item</code>.</li><li>Use the assignment operator (<code>=</code>) to assign one <code>Sales_item</code> object to another.</li><li>Use the addition operator (<code>+</code>) to add two <code>Sales_item</code> objects. The two objects must refer to the same <small>ISBN</small>. The result is a new <code>Sales_item</code> object whose <small>ISBN</small> is that of its operands and whose number sold and revenue are the sum of the corresponding values in its operands.</li><li>Use the compound assignment operator (<code>+=</code>) to add one <code>Sales_item</code> object into another.</li></ul>

::: info
<p>Key Concept: Classes Define Behavior</p>
<p>The important thing to keep in mind when you read these programs is that the author of the <code>Sales_item</code> class defines <em>all</em> the actions that can be performed by objects of this class. That is, the <code>Sales_item</code> class defines what happens when a <code>Sales_item</code> object is created and what happens when the assignment, addition, or the input and output operators are applied to <code>Sales_item</code>s.</p>
<p>In general, the class author determines all the operations that can be used on objects of the class type. For now, the only operations we know we can perform on <code>Sales_item</code> objects are the ones listed in this section.</p>
:::

<h5><a id="filepos227686"></a>Reading and Writing <code>Sales_item</code>s</h5>
<p>Now that we know what operations we can use with <code>Sales_item</code> objects, we can write programs that use the class. For example, the following program reads data from the standard input into a <code>Sales_item</code> object and writes that <code>Sales_item</code> back onto the standard output:</p>

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include "Sales_item.h"
int main()
{
    Sales_item book;
    // read ISBN, number of copies sold, and sales price
    std::cin >> book;
    // write ISBN, number of copies sold, total revenue, and average price
    std::cout << book << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```

<p>If the input to this program is</p>

```
0-201-70353-X 4 24.99
```

<p>then the output will be</p>

```
0-201-70353-X 4 99.96 24.99
```

<p>Our input says that we sold four copies of the book at $24.99 each, and the output indicates that the total sold was four, the total revenue was $99.96, and the average price per book was $24.99.</p>
<p>This program starts with two <code>#include</code> directives, one of which uses a new form. Headers from the standard library are enclosed in angle brackets (<code>&lt; &gt;</code>). Those that are not part of the library are enclosed in double quotes (<code>" "</code>).</p>
<p>Inside <code>main</code> we define an object, named <code>book</code>, that we’ll use to hold the data that we read from the standard input. The next statement reads into that object, and the third statement prints it to the standard output followed by printing <code>endl</code>.</p>
<h5>Adding <code>Sales_item</code>s</h5>
<p>A more interesting example adds two <code>Sales_item</code> objects:</p>

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include "Sales_item.h"
int main()
{
    Sales_item item1, item2;
    std::cin >> item1 >> item2;   // read a pair of transactions
    std::cout << item1 + item2 << std::endl; // print their sum
    return 0;
}
```

<p><a id="filepos232620"></a>If we give this program the following input</p>

```
0-201-78345-X 3 20.00
0-201-78345-X 2 25.00
```

<p>our output is</p>

```
0-201-78345-X 5 110 22
```

<p>This program starts by including the <code>Sales_item</code> and <code>iostream</code> headers. Next we define two <code>Sales_item</code> objects to hold the transactions. We read data into these objects from the standard input. The output expression does the addition and prints the result.</p>
<p>It’s worth noting how similar this program looks to the one on page <a href="012-1.2._a_first_look_at_inputoutput.html#filepos137881">6</a>: We read two inputs and write their sum. What makes this similarity noteworthy is that instead of reading and printing the sum of two integers, we’re reading and printing the sum of two <code>Sales_item</code> objects. Moreover, the whole idea of “sum” is different. In the case of <code>int</code>s we are generating a conventional sum—the result of adding two numeric values. In the case of <code>Sales_item</code> objects we use a conceptually new meaning for sum—the result of adding the components of two <code>Sales_item</code> objects.</p>

::: info
<p>Using File Redirection</p>
<p>It can be tedious to repeatedly type these transactions as input to the programs you are testing. Most operating systems support file redirection, which lets us associate a named file with the standard input and the standard output:</p>

```shellscript
$ addItems <infile >outfile
```

<p>Assuming <code>$</code> is the system prompt and our addition program has been compiled into an executable file named <code>addItems.exe</code> (or <code>addItems</code> on UNIX systems), this command will read transactions from a file named <code>infile</code> and write its output to a file named <code>outfile</code> in the current directory.</p>
:::

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 1.5.1</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.20:</strong>
<a href="http://www.informit.com/title/032174113">http://www.informit.com/title/032174113</a> contains a copy of <code>Sales_item.h</code> in the <a href="010-chapter_1._getting_started.html#filepos113276">Chapter 1</a> code directory. Copy that file to your working directory. Use it to write a program that reads a set of book sales transactions, writing each transaction to the standard output.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.21:</strong> Write a program that reads two <code>Sales_item</code> objects that have the same <small>ISBN</small> and produces their sum.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.22:</strong> Write a program that reads several transactions for the same <small>ISBN</small>. Write the sum of all the transactions that were read.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos237516"><a id="filepos237549"></a>1.5.2. A First Look at Member Functions</h4>
<p>Our program that adds two <code>Sales_item</code>s should check whether the objects have the same <small>ISBN</small>. We’ll do so as follows:</p>

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include "Sales_item.h"
int main()
{
    Sales_item item1, item2;
    std::cin >> item1 >> item2;
    // first check that item1 and item2 represent the same book
    if (item1.isbn() == item2.isbn()) {
        std::cout << item1 + item2 << std::endl;
        return 0;   // indicate success
    } else {
        std::cerr << "Data must refer to same ISBN"
                  << std::endl;
        return -1;  // indicate failure
    }
}
```

<p>The difference between this program and the previous version is the <code>if</code> and its associated <code>else</code> branch. Even without understanding the <code>if</code> condition, we know what this program does. If the condition succeeds, then we write the same output as before and return <code>0</code>, indicating success. If the condition fails, we execute the block following the <code>else</code>, which prints a message and returns an error indicator.</p>
<h5>What Is a Member Function?</h5>
<p>The <code>if</code> condition</p>

```c++
item1.isbn() == item2.isbn()
```

<p>calls a <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos264863" id="filepos240812">member function</a></strong> named <code>isbn</code>. A member function is a function that is defined as part of a class. Member functions are sometimes referred to as <strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos265142" id="filepos241078">methods</a></strong>.</p>
<p>Ordinarily, we call a member function on behalf of an object. For example, the first part of the left-hand operand of the equality expression</p>

```c++
item1.isbn
```

<p>uses the dot operator (the <strong>“<code>.</code>” operator</strong>) to say that we want “the <code>isbn</code> member of the object named <code>item1</code>.” The dot operator applies only to objects of class type. The left-hand operand must be an object of class type, and the right-hand operand must name a member of that type. The result of the dot operator is the member named by the right-hand operand.</p>
<p>When we use the dot operator to access a member function, we usually do so to call that function. We call a function using the call operator (the <a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos270767" id="filepos242416"><code>()</code>
<strong>operator</strong></a>). The call operator is a pair of parentheses that enclose a (possibly empty) list of <em><strong><a href="018-defined_terms.html#filepos254407" id="filepos242715">arguments</a></strong></em>. The <code>isbn</code> member function does not take an argument. Thus,</p>

```c++
item1.isbn()
```

<p><a id="filepos243116"></a>calls the <code>isbn</code> function that is a member of the object named <code>item1</code>. This function returns the <small>ISBN</small> stored in <code>item1</code>.</p>
<p>The right-hand operand of the equality operator executes in the same way—it returns the <small>ISBN</small> stored in <code>item2</code>. If the <small>ISBN</small>s are the same, the condition is true; otherwise it is false.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 1.5.2</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.23:</strong> Write a program that reads several transactions and counts how many transactions occur for each <small>ISBN</small>.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.24:</strong> Test the previous program by giving multiple transactions representing multiple <small>ISBN</small>s. The records for each <small>ISBN</small> should be grouped together.</p>
:::
