<h3 id="filepos244566">1.6. The Bookstore Program</h3>
<p>We are now ready to solve our original bookstore problem. We need to read a file of sales transactions and produce a report that shows, for each book, the total number of copies sold, the total revenue, and the average sales price. We’ll assume that all the transactions for each <small>ISBN</small> are grouped together in the input.</p>
<p>Our program will combine the data for each <small>ISBN</small> in a variable named <code>total</code>. We’ll use a second variable named <code>trans</code> to hold each transaction we read. If <code>trans</code> and <code>total</code> refer to the same <small>ISBN</small>, we’ll update <code>total</code>. Otherwise we’ll print <code>total</code> and reset it using the transaction we just read:</p>

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include "Sales_item.h"
int main()
{
    Sales_item total; // variable to hold data for the next transaction
    // read the first transaction and ensure that there are data to process
    if (std::cin >> total) {
        Sales_item trans; // variable to hold the running sum
        // read and process the remaining transactions
        while (std::cin >> trans) {
            // if we're still processing the same book
            if (total.isbn() == trans.isbn())
                total += trans; // update the running total
            else {
                // print results for the previous book
                std::cout << total << std::endl;
                total = trans;  // total now refers to the next book
            }
        }
        std::cout << total << std::endl; // print the last transaction
    } else {
        // no input! warn the user
        std::cerr << "No data?!" << std::endl;
        return -1;  // indicate failure
    }
    return 0;
}
```

<p>This program is the most complicated one we’ve seen so far, but it uses only facilities that we have already seen.</p>
<p>As usual, we begin by including the headers that we use, <code>iostream</code> from the library and our own <code>Sales_item.h</code>. Inside <code>main</code> we define an object named <code>total</code>, which we’ll use to sum the data for a given <small>ISBN</small>. We start by reading the first transaction into <code>total</code> and testing whether the read was successful. If the read fails, then there are no records and we fall through to the outermost <code>else</code> branch, which tells the user that there was no input.</p>
<p>Assuming we have successfully read a record, we execute the block following the outermost <code>if</code>. That block starts by defining the object named <code>trans</code>, which will hold our transactions as we read them. The <code>while</code> statement will read all the remaining records. As in our earlier programs, the <code>while</code> condition reads a value from the standard input. In this case, we read a <code>Sales_item</code> object into <code>trans</code>. As long as the read succeeds, we execute the body of the <code>while</code>.</p>
<p>The body of the <code>while</code> is a single <code>if</code> statement. The <code>if</code> checks whether the <small>ISBN</small>s are equal. If so, we use the compound assignment operator to add <code>trans</code> to <code>total</code>. If the <small>ISBN</small>s are not equal, we print the value stored in <code>total</code> and reset <code>total</code> by assigning <code>trans</code> to it. After executing the <code>if</code>, we return to the condition in the <code>while</code>, reading the next transaction, and so on until we run out of records.</p>
<p>When the <code>while</code> terminates, <code>total</code> contains the data for the last <small>ISBN</small> in the file. We write the data for the last <small>ISBN</small> in the last statement of the block that concludes the outermost <code>if</code> statement.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 1.6</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 1.25:</strong> Using the <code>Sales_item.h</code> header from the Web site, compile and execute the bookstore program presented in this section.</p>
:::
