---
title: 2.6. Defining Our Own Data Structures
---

<h3 id="filepos576488">2.6. Defining Our Own Data Structures</h3>
<Badge type="info" text="Fundamental" />
<p>At the most basic level, a data structure is a way to group together related data elements and a strategy for using those data. As one example, our <code>Sales_item</code> class groups an <small>ISBN</small>, a count of how many copies of that book had been sold, and the revenue associated with those sales. It also provides a set of operations such as the <code>isbn</code> function and the <code>&gt;&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;&lt;</code>, <code>+</code>, and <code>+=</code> operators.</p>
<p>In C++ we define our own data types by defining a class. The library types <code>string</code>, <code>istream</code>, and <code>ostream</code> are all defined as classes, as is the <code>Sales_item</code> type we used in <a href="010-chapter_1._getting_started.html#filepos113276">Chapter 1</a>. C++ support for classes is extensive—in fact, <a href="119-part_iii_tools_for_class_authors.html#filepos3192626">Parts III</a> and <a href="161-part_iv_advanced_topics.html#filepos4558192">IV</a> are largely devoted to describing class-related features. Even though the <code>Sales_item</code> class is pretty simple, we won’t be able to fully define that class until we learn how to write our own operators in <a href="129-chapter_14._overloaded_operations_and_conversions.html#filepos3544393">Chapter 14</a>.</p>
<h4 id="filepos578460">2.6.1. Defining the <code>Sales_data</code> Type</h4>
<Badge type="info" text="Fundamental" />
<p>Although we can’t yet write our <code>Sales_item</code> class, we can write a more concrete class that groups the same data elements. Our strategy for using this class is that users will be able to access the data elements directly and must implement needed operations for themselves.</p>
<p>Because our data structure does not support any operations, we’ll name our version <code>Sales_data</code> to distinguish it from <code>Sales_item</code>. We’ll define our class as follows:</p>
<p><a id="filepos579560"></a></p>

```c++
struct Sales_data {
    std::string bookNo;
    unsigned units_sold = 0;
    double revenue = 0.0;
};
```

<p>Our class begins with the keyword <code>struct</code>, followed by the name of the class and a (possibly empty) class body. The class body is surrounded by curly braces and forms a new scope (§ <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos382972">2.2.4</a>, p. <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos382972">48</a>). The names defined inside the class must be unique within the class but can reuse names defined outside the class.</p>
<p>The close curly that ends the class body must be followed by a semicolon. The semicolon is needed because we can define variables after the class body:</p>

```c++
struct Sales_data { /* ... */ } accum, trans, *salesptr;
// equivalent, but better way to define these objects
struct Sales_data { /* ... */ };
Sales_data accum, trans, *salesptr;
```

<p>The semicolon marks the end of the (usually empty) list of declarators. Ordinarily, it is a bad idea to define an object as part of a class definition. Doing so obscures the code by combining the definitions of two different entities—the class and a variable—in a single statement.</p>

::: warning
<p>It is a common mistake among new programmers to forget the semicolon at the end of a class definition.</p>
:::

<h5>Class Data Members</h5>
<p>The class body defines the <strong><a href="028-defined_terms.html#filepos621915" id="filepos582304">members</a></strong> of the class. Our class has only <strong><a href="028-defined_terms.html#filepos616257" id="filepos582406">data members</a></strong>. The data members of a class define the contents of the objects of that class type. Each object has its own copy of the class data members. Modifying the data members of one object does not change the data in any other <code>Sales_data</code> object.</p>
<p>We define data members the same way that we define normal variables: We specify a base type followed by a list of one or more declarators. Our class has three data members: a member of type <code>string</code> named <code>bookNo</code>, an <code>unsigned</code> member named <code>units_sold</code>, and a member of type <code>double</code> named <code>revenue</code>. Each <code>Sales_data</code> object will have these three data members.</p>
<p>Under the new standard, we can supply an <strong><a href="028-defined_terms.html#filepos619442" id="filepos583741">in-class initializer</a></strong> for a data member. When we create objects, the in-class initializers will be used to initialize the data members. Members without an initializer are default initialized (§ <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">2.2.1</a>, p. <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">43</a>). Thus, when we define <code>Sales_data</code> objects, <code>units_sold</code> and <code>revenue</code> will be initialized to 0, and <code>bookNo</code> will be initialized to the empty string.</p>
<a id="filepos584501"></a><Badge type="tip" text="C++11" />
<p>In-class initializers are restricted as to the form (§ <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">2.2.1</a>, p. <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">43</a>) we can use: They must either be enclosed inside curly braces or follow an <code>=</code> sign. We may not specify an in-class initializer inside parentheses.</p>
<p>In § <a href="074-7.2._access_control_and_encapsulation.html#filepos1833387">7.2</a> (p. <a href="074-7.2._access_control_and_encapsulation.html#filepos1833387">268</a>), we’ll see that C++ has a second keyword, <code>class</code>, that can be used to define our own data structures. We’ll explain in that section why we use <code>struct</code> here. Until we cover additional class-related features in <a href="072-chapter_7._classes.html#filepos1741323">Chapter 7</a>, you should use <code>struct</code> to define your own data structures.</p>

::: info
<a id="filepos585630"></a><p>Exercises Section 2.6.1</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 2.39:</strong> Compile the following program to see what happens when you forget the semicolon after a class definition. Remember the message for future reference.</p>

```c++
struct Foo { /* empty   */ } // Note: no semicolon
int main()
{
    return 0;
}
```

<p><strong>Exercise 2.40:</strong> Write your own version of the <code>Sales_data</code> class.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos586875">2.6.2. Using the <code>Sales_data</code> Class</h4>
<Badge type="info" text="Fundamental" />
<p>Unlike the <code>Sales_item</code> class, our <code>Sales_data</code> class does not provide any operations. Users of <code>Sales_data</code> have to write whatever operations they need. As an example, we’ll write a version of the program from § <a href="015-1.5._introducing_classes.html#filepos237516">1.5.2</a> (p. <a href="015-1.5._introducing_classes.html#filepos237516">23</a>) that printed the sum of two transactions. The input to our program will be transactions such as</p>

```
0-201-78345-X 3 20.00
0-201-78345-X 2 25.00
```

<p>Each transaction holds an <small>ISBN</small>, the count of how many books were sold, and the price at which each book was sold.</p>
<h5>Adding Two <code>Sales_data</code> Objects</h5>
<p>Because <code>Sales_data</code> provides no operations, we will have to write our own code to do the input, output, and addition operations. We’ll assume that our <code>Sales_data</code> class is defined inside <code>Sales_data.h</code>. We’ll see how to define this header in § <a href="026-2.6._defining_our_own_data_structures.html#filepos600691">2.6.3</a> (p. <a href="026-2.6._defining_our_own_data_structures.html#filepos600691">76</a>).</p>
<p>Because this program will be longer than any we’ve written so far, we’ll explain it in separate parts. Overall, our program will have the following structure:</p>

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include "Sales_data.h"
int main()
{
    Sales_data data1, data2;
    // code to read into data1 and data2
    // code to check whether data1 and data2 have the same ISBN
    //    and if so print the sum of data1 and data2
}
```

<p>As in our original program, we begin by including the headers we’ll need and define variables to hold the input. Note that unlike the <code>Sales_item</code> version, our new program includes the <code>string</code> header. We need that header because our code will have to manage the <code>bookNo</code> member, which has type <code>string</code>.</p>
<h5>Reading Data into a <code>Sales_data</code> Object</h5>
<p>Although we won’t describe the library <code>string</code> type in detail until <a href="029-chapter_3._strings_vectors_and_arrays.html#filepos633734">Chapters 3</a> and <a href="097-chapter_10._generic_algorithms.html#filepos2454824">10</a>, we need to know only a little bit about <code>string</code>s in order to define and use our <small>ISBN</small> member. The <code>string</code> type holds a sequence of characters. Its operations include the <code>&gt;&gt;, &lt;&lt;</code>, and <code>==</code> operators to read, write, and compare <code>string</code>s, respectively. With this knowledge we can write the code to read the first transaction:</p>

```c++
double price = 0;   // price per book, used to calculate total revenue
// read the first transactions: ISBN, number of books sold, price per book
std::cin >> data1.bookNo >> data1.units_sold >> price;
// calculate total revenue from price and units_sold
data1.revenue = data1.units_sold * price;
```

<p>Our transactions contain the price at which each book was sold but our data structure stores the total revenue. We’ll read the transaction data into a <code>double</code> named <code>price</code>, from which we’ll calculate the <code>revenue</code> member. The input statement</p>

```c++
std::cin >> data1.bookNo >> data1.units_sold >> price;
```

<p>uses the dot operator (§ <a href="015-1.5._introducing_classes.html#filepos237516">1.5.2</a>, p. <a href="015-1.5._introducing_classes.html#filepos237516">23</a>) to read into the <code>bookNo</code> and <code>units_sold</code> members of the object named <code>data1</code>.</p>
<p>The last statement assigns the product of <code>data1.units_sold</code> and <code>price</code> into the <code>revenue</code> member of <code>data1</code>.</p>
<p>Our program will next repeat the same code to read data into <code>data2</code>:</p>

```c++
// read the second transaction
std::cin >> data2.bookNo >> data2.units_sold >> price;
data2.revenue = data2.units_sold * price;
```

<h5>Printing the Sum of Two <code>Sales_data</code> Objects</h5>
<p>Our other task is to check that the transactions are for the same <small>ISBN</small>. If so, we’ll print their sum, otherwise, we’ll print an error message:</p>

```c++
if (data1.bookNo == data2.bookNo) {
    unsigned totalCnt = data1.units_sold + data2.units_sold;
    double totalRevenue = data1.revenue + data2.revenue;
    // print: ISBN, total sold, total revenue, average price per book
    std::cout << data1.bookNo << " " << totalCnt
              << " " << totalRevenue << " ";
    if (totalCnt != 0)
        std::cout << totalRevenue/totalCnt << std::endl;
    else
        std::cout << "(no sales)" << std::endl;
    return 0; // indicate success
} else {  // transactions weren't for the same ISBN
    std::cerr << "Data must refer to the same ISBN"
              << std::endl;
    return -1; // indicate failure
}
```

<p><a id="filepos598683"></a>In the first <code>if</code> we compare the <code>bookNo</code> members of <code>data1</code> and <code>data2</code>. If those members are the same <small>ISBN</small>, we execute the code inside the curly braces. That code adds the components of our two variables. Because we’ll need to print the average price, we start by computing the total of <code>units_sold</code> and <code>revenue</code> and store those in <code>totalCnt</code> and <code>totalRevenue</code>, respectively. We print those values. Next we check that there were books sold and, if so, print the computed average price per book. If there were no sales, we print a message noting that fact.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 2.6.2</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 2.41:</strong> Use your <code>Sales_data</code> class to rewrite the exercises in § <a href="015-1.5._introducing_classes.html#filepos222335">1.5.1</a> (p. <a href="015-1.5._introducing_classes.html#filepos222335">22</a>), § <a href="015-1.5._introducing_classes.html#filepos237516">1.5.2</a> (p. <a href="015-1.5._introducing_classes.html#filepos237516">24</a>), and § <a href="016-1.6._the_bookstore_program.html#filepos244566">1.6</a> (p. <a href="016-1.6._the_bookstore_program.html#filepos244566">25</a>). For now, you should define your <code>Sales_data</code> class in the same file as your <code>main</code> function.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos600691">2.6.3. Writing Our Own Header Files</h4>
<Badge type="info" text="Fundamental" />
<p>Although as we’ll see in § <a href="183-19.7._local_classes.html#filepos5346574">19.7</a> (p. <a href="183-19.7._local_classes.html#filepos5346574">852</a>), we can define a class inside a function, such classes have limited functionality. As a result, classes ordinarily are not defined inside functions. When we define a class outside of a function, there may be only one definition of that class in any given source file. In addition, if we use a class in several different files, the class’ definition must be the same in each file.</p>
<p>In order to ensure that the class definition is the same in each file, classes are usually defined in header files. Typically, classes are stored in headers whose name derives from the name of the class. For example, the <code>string</code> library type is defined in the <code>string</code> header. Similarly, as we’ve already seen, we will define our <code>Sales_data</code> class in a header file named <code>Sales_data.h</code>.</p>
<p>Headers (usually) contain entities (such as class definitions and <code>const</code> and <code>constexpr</code> variables (§ <a href="024-2.4._const_qualifier.html#filepos462256">2.4</a>, p. <a href="024-2.4._const_qualifier.html#filepos462256">60</a>)) that can be defined only once in any given file. However, headers often need to use facilities from other headers. For example, because our <code>Sales_data</code> class has a <code>string</code> member, <code>Sales_data.h</code> must <code>#include</code> the <code>string</code> header. As we’ve seen, programs that use <code>Sales_data</code> also need to include the <code>string</code> header in order to use the <code>bookNo</code> member. As a result, programs that use <code>Sales_data</code> will include the <code>string</code> header twice: once directly and once as a side effect of including <code>Sales_data.h</code>. Because a header might be included more than once, we need to write our headers in a way that is safe even if the header is included multiple times.</p>

::: info
<p>Whenever a header is updated, the source files that use that header must be recompiled to get the new or changed declarations.</p>
:::

<h5>A Brief Introduction to the Preprocessor</h5>
<p>The most common technique for making it safe to include a header multiple times relies on the <strong><a href="028-defined_terms.html#filepos624035" id="filepos604512">preprocessor</a></strong>. The preprocessor—which C++ inherits from C—is a <a id="filepos604639"></a>program that runs before the compiler and changes the source text of our programs. Our programs already rely on one preprocessor facility, <code>#include</code>. When the preprocessor sees a <code>#include</code>, it replaces the <code>#include</code> with the contents of the specified header.</p>
<p>C++ programs also use the preprocessor to define <strong><a href="028-defined_terms.html#filepos618920" id="filepos605213">header guards</a></strong>. Header guards rely on preprocessor variables (§ <a href="023-2.3._compound_types.html#filepos409391">2.3.2</a>, p. <a href="023-2.3._compound_types.html#filepos409391">53</a>). Preprocessor variables have one of two possible states: defined or not defined. The <code>#define</code> directive takes a name and defines that name as a preprocessor variable. There are two other directives that test whether a given preprocessor variable has or has not been defined: <code>#ifdef</code> is true if the variable has been defined, and <code>#ifndef</code> is true if the variable has <em>not</em> been defined. If the test is true, then everything following the <code>#ifdef</code> or <code>#ifndef</code> is processed up to the matching <code>#endif</code>.</p>
<p>We can use these facilities to guard against multiple inclusion as follows:</p>

```c++
#ifndef SALES_DATA_H
#define SALES_DATA_H
#include <string>
struct Sales_data {
    std::string bookNo;
    unsigned units_sold = 0;
    double revenue = 0.0;
};
#endif
```

<p>The first time <code>Sales_data.h</code> is included, the <code>#ifndef</code> test will succeed. The preprocessor will process the lines following <code>#ifndef</code> up to the <code>#endif</code>. As a result, the preprocessor variable <code>SALES_DATA_H</code> will be defined and the contents of <code>Sales_data.h</code> will be copied into our program. If we include <code>Sales_data.h</code> later on in the same file, the <code>#ifndef</code> directive will be false. The lines between it and the <code>#endif</code> directive will be ignored.</p>

::: warning
<p>Preprocessor variable names do not respect C++ scoping rules.</p>
:::

<p>Preprocessor variables, including names of header guards, must be unique throughout the program. Typically we ensure uniqueness by basing the guard’s name on the name of a class in the header. To avoid name clashes with other entities in our programs, preprocessor variables usually are written in all uppercase.</p>

::: tip
<p>Best Practices</p>
<p>Headers should have guards, even if they aren’t (yet) included by another header. Header guards are trivial to write, and by habitually defining them you don’t need to decide whether they are needed.</p>
:::

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 2.6.3</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 2.42:</strong> Write your own version of the <code>Sales_data.h</code> header and use it to rewrite the exercise from § <a href="026-2.6._defining_our_own_data_structures.html#filepos586875">2.6.2</a> (p. <a href="026-2.6._defining_our_own_data_structures.html#filepos586875">76</a>).</p>
:::
