<h2 id="filepos633734">Chapter 3. Strings, Vectors, and Arrays</h2>
<p>Contents</p><ul><li><strong><a href="030-3.1._namespace_using_declarations.html#filepos638596">Section 3.1 Namespace <code>using</code> Declarations</a></strong></li><li><strong><a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos649069">Section 3.2 Library <code>string</code> Type</a></strong></li><li><strong><a href="032-3.3._library_vector_type.html#filepos736471">Section 3.3 Library <code>vector</code> Type</a></strong></li><li><strong><a href="033-3.4._introducing_iterators.html#filepos802543">Section 3.4 Introducing Iterators</a></strong></li><li><strong><a href="034-3.5._arrays.html#filepos853883">Section 3.5 Arrays</a></strong></li><li><strong><a href="035-3.6._multidimensional_arrays.html#filepos942882">Section 3.6 Multidimensional Arrays</a></strong></li><li><strong><a href="036-chapter_summary.html#filepos976418">Chapter Summary</a></strong></li><li><strong><a href="037-defined_terms.html#filepos977758">Defined Terms</a></strong></li></ul>

<p>In addition to the built-in types covered in <a href="020-chapter_2._variables_and_basic_types.html#filepos284544">Chapter 2</a>, C++ defines a rich library of abstract data types. Among the most important library types are <code>string</code>, which supports variable-length character strings, and <code>vector</code>, which defines variable-size collections. Associated with <code>string</code> and <code>vector</code> are companion types known as iterators, which are used to access the characters in a <code>string</code> or the elements in a <code>vector</code>.</p>
<p>The <code>string</code> and <code>vector</code> types defined by the library are abstractions of the more primitive built-in array type. This chapter covers arrays and introduces the library <code>vector</code> and <code>string</code> types.</p>
<p><a id="filepos637108"></a><em>The built-in types</em> that we covered in <a href="020-chapter_2._variables_and_basic_types.html#filepos284544">Chapter 2</a> are defined directly by the C++ language. These types represent facilities present in most computer hardware, such as numbers or characters. The standard library defines a number of additional types of a higher-level nature that computer hardware usually does not implement directly.</p>
<p>In this chapter, we’ll introduce two of the most important library types: <code>string</code> and <code>vector</code>. A <code>string</code> is a variable-length sequence of characters. A <code>vector</code> holds a variable-length sequence of objects of a given type. We’ll also cover the built-in array type. Like other built-in types, arrays represent facilities of the hardware. As a result, arrays are less convenient to use than the library <code>string</code> and <code>vector</code> types.</p>
<p>Before beginning our exploration of the library types, we’ll look at a mechanism for simplifying access to the names defined in the library.</p>
