---
title: 3.3. Library vector Type
---

<h3 id="filepos736471">3.3. Library <code>vector</code> Type</h3>
<Badge type="info" text="Fundamental" />
<p>A <code>vector</code> is a collection of objects, all of which have the same type. Every object in the collection has an associated index, which gives access to that object. A <code>vector</code> is often referred to as a <strong><a href="037-defined_terms.html#filepos980018" id="filepos737227">container</a></strong> because it “contains” other objects. We’ll have much more to say about containers in <a href="081-part_ii_the_cpp_library.html#filepos2066884">Part II</a>.</p>
<p>To use a <code>vector</code>, we must include the appropriate header. In our examples, we also assume that an appropriate <code>using</code> declaration is made:</p>

```c++
#include <vector>
using std::vector;
```

<p>A <code>vector</code> is a <strong><a href="037-defined_terms.html#filepos979108" id="filepos738087">class template</a></strong>. C++ has both class and function templates. Writing a template requires a fairly deep understanding of C++. Indeed, we won’t see how to create our own templates until <a href="153-chapter_16._templates_and_generic_programming.html#filepos4150078">Chapter 16</a>! Fortunately, we can use templates without knowing how to write them.</p>
<p>Templates are not themselves functions or classes. Instead, they can be thought of as instructions to the compiler for generating classes or functions. The process that the compiler uses to create classes or functions from templates is called <strong><a href="037-defined_terms.html#filepos983678" id="filepos738752">instantiation</a></strong>. When we use a template, we specify what kind of class or function we want the compiler to instantiate.</p>
<p>For a class template, we specify which class to instantiate by supplying additional information, the nature of which depends on the template. How we specify the information is always the same: We supply it inside a pair of angle brackets following the template’s name.</p>
<p>In the case of <code>vector</code>, the additional information we supply is the type of the objects the <code>vector</code> will hold:</p>
<p><a id="filepos739629"></a></p>

```c++
vector<int> ivec;             // ivec holds objects of type int
vector<Sales_item> Sales_vec; // holds Sales_items
vector<vector<string>> file;  // vector whose elements are vectors
```

<p>In this example, the compiler generates three distinct types from the <code>vector</code> template: <code>vector&lt;int&gt;</code>, <code>vector&lt;Sales_item&gt;</code>, and <code>vector&lt;vector&lt;string&gt;&gt;</code>.</p>

::: info
<p><code>vector</code> is a template, not a type. Types generated from <code>vector</code> must include the element type, for example, <code>vector&lt;int&gt;</code>.</p>
:::

<p>We can define <code>vector</code>s to hold objects of most any type. Because references are not objects (§ <a href="023-2.3._compound_types.html#filepos396246">2.3.1</a>, p. <a href="023-2.3._compound_types.html#filepos396246">50</a>), we cannot have a <code>vector</code> of references. However, we can have <code>vector</code>s of most other (nonreference) built-in types and most class types. In particular, we can have <code>vector</code>s whose elements are themselves <code>vector</code>s.</p>
<a id="filepos742732"></a><Badge type="tip" text="C++11" />
<p>It is worth noting that earlier versions of C++ used a slightly different syntax to define a <code>vector</code> whose elements are themselves <code>vector</code>s (or another template type). In the past, we had to supply a space between the closing angle bracket of the outer <code>vector</code> and its element type—<code>vector&lt;vector&lt;int&gt; &gt;</code> rather than <code>vector&lt;vector&lt;int&gt;&gt;</code>.</p>

::: warning
<p>Some compilers may require the old-style declarations for a <code>vector</code> of <code>vector</code>s, for example, <code>vector&lt;vector&lt;int&gt; &gt;</code>.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos744172">3.3.1. Defining and Initializing <code>vector</code>s</h4>
<Badge type="info" text="Fundamental" />
<p>As with any class type, the <code>vector</code> template controls how we define and initialize <code>vector</code>s. <a href="032-3.3._library_vector_type.html#filepos744972">Table 3.4</a> (p. <a href="032-3.3._library_vector_type.html#filepos744972">99</a>) lists the most common ways to define <code>vector</code>s.</p>
<p><a id="filepos744972"></a>Table 3.4. Ways to Initialize a <code>vector</code></p>

| Code                            | Description                                                                                                  |
|---------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `vector<T> v1`                  | `vector` that holds objects of type `T`. Default initialization; `v1` is empty.                              |
| `vector<T> v2(v1)`              | `v2` has a copy of each element in `v1`.                                                                     |
| `vector<T> v2 = v1`             | Equivalent to `v2(v1)`, `v2` is a copy of the elements in `v1`.                                              |
| `vector<T> v3(n, val)`          | `v3` has `n` elements with value `val`.                                                                      |
| `vector<T> v4(n)`               | `v4` has `n` copies of a value-initialized object.                                                           |
| `vector<T> v5 {a, b, c, ...}`   | `v5` has as many elements as there are initializers; elements are initialized by corresponding initializers. |
| `vector<T> v5 = {a, b, c, ...}` | Equivalent to `v5 {a, b, c, ...}`.                                                                           |

<p>We can default initialize a <code>vector</code> (§ <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">2.2.1</a>, p. <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">44</a>), which creates an empty <code>vector</code> of the specified type:</p>

```c++
vector<string> svec; // default initialization; svec has no elements
```

<p>It might seem that an empty <code>vector</code> would be of little use. However, as we’ll see shortly, we can (efficiently) add elements to a <code>vector</code> at run time. Indeed, the most common way of using <code>vector</code>s is to define an initially empty <code>vector</code> to which elements are added as their values become known at run time.</p>
<p>We can also supply initial value(s) for the element(s) when we define a <code>vector</code>. For example, we can copy elements from another <code>vector</code>. When we copy a <code>vector</code>, each element in the new <code>vector</code> is a copy of the corresponding element in the original <code>vector</code>. The two <code>vector</code>s must be the same type:</p>

```c++
vector<int> ivec;             // initially empty
// give ivec some values
vector<int> ivec2(ivec);      // copy elements of ivec into ivec2
vector<int> ivec3 = ivec;     // copy elements of ivec into ivec3
vector<string> svec(ivec2);   // error: svec holds strings, not ints
```

<h5><a id="filepos749603"></a>List Initializing a <code>vector</code></h5>
<a id="filepos749816"></a><Badge type="tip" text="C++11" />
<p>Another way to provide element values, is that under the new standard, we can list initialize (§ <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">2.2.1</a>, p. <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">43</a>) a <code>vector</code> from a list of zero or more initial element values enclosed in curly braces:</p>

```c++
vector<string> articles = {"a", "an", "the"};
```

<p>The resulting <code>vector</code> has three elements; the first holds the <code>string "a"</code>, the second holds <code>"an"</code>, and the last is <code>"the"</code>.</p>
<p>As we’ve seen, C++ provides several forms of initialization (§ <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">2.2.1</a>, p. <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">43</a>). In many, but not all, cases we can use these forms of initialization interchangably. So far, we have seen two examples where the form of initialization matters: when we use the copy initialization form (i.e., when we use <code>=</code>) (§ <a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos651083">3.2.1</a>, p. <a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos651083">84</a>), we can supply only a single initializer; and when we supply an in-class initializer (§ <a href="026-2.6._defining_our_own_data_structures.html#filepos578460">2.6.1</a>, p. <a href="026-2.6._defining_our_own_data_structures.html#filepos578460">73</a>), we must either use copy initialization or use curly braces. A third restriction is that we can supply a list of element values only by using list initialization in which the initializers are enclosed in curly braces. We cannot supply a list of initializers using parentheses:</p>

```c++
vector<string> v1{"a", "an", "the"};  // list initialization
vector<string> v2("a", "an", "the");  // error
```

<h5>Creating a Specified Number of Elements</h5>
<p>We can also initialize a <code>vector</code> from a count and an element value. The count determines how many elements the <code>vector</code> will have; the value provides the initial value for each of those elements:</p>

```c++
vector<int> ivec(10, -1);       // ten int elements, each initialized to -1
vector<string> svec(10, "hi!"); // ten strings; each element is "hi!"
```

<h5>Value Initialization</h5>
<p>We can usually omit the value and supply only a size. In this case the library creates a <strong><a href="037-defined_terms.html#filepos989336" id="filepos754307">value-initialized</a></strong> element initializer for us. This library-generated value is used to initialize each element in the container. The value of the element initializer depends on the type of the elements stored in the <code>vector</code>.</p>
<p>If the <code>vector</code> holds elements of a built-in type, such as <code>int</code>, then the element initializer has a value of 0. If the elements are of a class type, such as <code>string</code>, then the element initializer is itself default initialized:</p>

```c++
vector<int> ivec(10);    // ten elements, each initialized to 0
vector<string> svec(10); // ten elements, each an empty string
```

<p>There are two restrictions on this form of initialization: The first restriction is that some classes require that we always supply an explicit initializer (§ <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">2.2.1</a>, p. <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">44</a>). If our <code>vector</code> holds objects of a type that we cannot default initialize, then we must supply an initial element value; it is not possible to create <code>vector</code>s of such types by supplying only a size.</p>
<p>The second restriction is that when we supply an element count without also supplying an initial value, we must use the direct form of initialization:</p>
<p><a id="filepos756668"></a></p>

```c++
vector<int> vi = 10;    // error: must use direct initialization to supply a size
```

<p>Here we are using 10 to instruct <code>vector</code> how to create the <code>vector</code>—we want a <code>vector</code> with ten value-initialized elements. We are not “copying” 10 into the <code>vector</code>. Hence, we cannot use the copy form of initialization. We’ll see more about how this restriction works in § <a href="077-7.5._constructors_revisited.html#filepos1990205">7.5.4</a> (p. <a href="077-7.5._constructors_revisited.html#filepos1990205">296</a>).</p>
<h5>List Initializer or Element Count?</h5>
<Badge type="warning" text="Tricky" />
<p>In a few cases, what initialization means depends upon whether we use curly braces or parentheses to pass the initializer(s). For example, when we initialize a <code>vector&lt;int&gt;</code> from a single <code>int</code> value, that value might represent the <code>vector</code>’s size or it might be an element value. Similarly, if we supply exactly two <code>int</code> values, those values could be a size and an initial value, or they could be values for a two-element <code>vector</code>. We specify which meaning we intend by whether we use curly braces or parentheses:</p>

```c++
vector<int> v1(10);    // v1 has ten elements with value 0
vector<int> v2{10};    // v2 has one element with value 10
vector<int> v3(10, 1); // v3 has ten elements with value 1
vector<int> v4{10, 1}; // v4 has two elements with values 10 and 1
```

<p>When we use parentheses, we are saying that the values we supply are to be used to <em>construct</em> the object. Thus, <code>v1</code> and <code>v3</code> use their initializers to determine the <code>vector</code>’s size, and its size and element values, respectively.</p>
<p>When we use curly braces, <code>{...}</code>, we’re saying that, if possible, we want to <em>list initialize</em> the object. That is, if there is a way to use the values inside the curly braces as a list of element initializers, the class will do so. Only if it is not possible to list initialize the object will the other ways to initialize the object be considered. The values we supply when we initialize <code>v2</code> and <code>v4</code> can be used as element values. These objects are list initialized; the resulting <code>vector</code>s have one and two elements, respectively.</p>
<p>On the other hand, if we use braces and there is no way to use the initializers to list initialize the object, then those values will be used to construct the object. For <a id="filepos761921"></a>example, to list initialize a <code>vector</code> of <code>string</code>s, we must supply values that can be used as <code>string</code>s. In this case, there is no confusion about whether to list initialize the elements or construct a <code>vector</code> of the given size:</p>

```c++
vector<string> v5{"hi"}; // list initialization: v5 has one element
vector<string> v6("hi"); // error: can't construct a vector from a string literal
vector<string> v7{10};       // v7 has ten default-initialized elements
vector<string> v8{10, "hi"}; // v8 has ten elements with value "hi"
```

<p>Although we used braces on all but one of these definitions, only <code>v5</code> is list initialized. In order to list initialize the <code>vector</code>, the values inside braces must match the element type. We cannot use an <code>int</code> to initialize a <code>string</code>, so the initializers for <code>v7</code> and <code>v8</code> can’t be element initializers. If list initialization isn’t possible, the compiler looks for other ways to initialize the object from the given values.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 3.3.1</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 3.12:</strong> Which, if any, of the following <code>vector</code> definitions are in error? For those that are legal, explain what the definition does. For those that are not legal, explain why they are illegal.</p>
<p><strong>(a)</strong>
<code>vector&lt;vector&lt;int&gt;&gt; ivec;</code></p>
<p><strong>(b)</strong>
<code>vector&lt;string&gt; svec = ivec;</code></p>
<p><strong>(c)</strong>
<code>vector&lt;string&gt; svec(10, "null");</code></p>
<p><a id="filepos765880"></a><strong>Exercise 3.13:</strong> How many elements are there in each of the following <code>vector</code>s? What are the values of the elements?</p>
<p><strong>(a)</strong>
<code>vector&lt;int&gt; v1;</code></p>
<p><strong>(b)</strong>
<code>vector&lt;int&gt; v2(10);</code></p>
<p><strong>(c)</strong>
<code>vector&lt;int&gt; v3(10, 42);</code></p>
<p><strong>(d)</strong>
<code>vector&lt;int&gt; v4{10};</code></p>
<p><strong>(e)</strong>
<code>vector&lt;int&gt; v5{10, 42};</code></p>
<p><strong>(f)</strong>
<code>vector&lt;string&gt; v6{10};</code></p>
<p><strong>(g)</strong>
<code>vector&lt;string&gt; v7{10, "hi"};</code></p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos767585">3.3.2. Adding Elements to a <code>vector</code></h4>
<Badge type="info" text="Fundamental" />
<p>Directly initializing the elements of a <code>vector</code> is feasible only if we have a small number of known initial values, if we want to make a copy of another <code>vector</code>, or if we want to initialize all the elements to the same value. More commonly, when we create a <code>vector</code>, we don’t know how many elements we’ll need, or we don’t know the value of those elements. Even if we do know all the values, if we have a large number of different initial element values, it can be cumbersome to specify them when we create the <code>vector</code>.</p>
<p>As one example, if we need a <code>vector</code> with values from 0 to 9, we can easily use list initialization. What if we wanted elements from 0 to 99 or 0 to 999? List initialization would be too unwieldy. In such cases, it is better to create an empty <code>vector</code> and use a <code>vector</code> member named <code>push_back</code> to add elements at run time. The <code>push_back</code> operation takes a value and “pushes” that value as a new last element onto the “back” of the <code>vector</code>. For example:</p>
<p><a id="filepos769787"></a></p>

```c++
vector<int> v2;        // empty vector
for (int i = 0; i != 100; ++i)
    v2.push_back(i);    // append sequential integers to v2
// at end of loop v2 has 100 elements, values 0 . . . 99
```

<p>Even though we know we ultimately will have 100 elements, we define <code>v2</code> as empty. Each iteration adds the next sequential integer as a new element in <code>v2</code>.</p>
<p>We use the same approach when we want to create a <code>vector</code> where we don’t know until run time how many elements the <code>vector</code> should have. For example, we might read the input, storing the values we read in the <code>vector</code>:</p>

```c++
// read words from the standard input and store them as elements in a vector
string word;
vector<string> text;       // empty vector
while (cin >> word) {
    text.push_back(word);  // append word to text
}
```

<p>Again, we start with an initially empty <code>vector</code>. This time, we read and store an unknown number of values in <code>text</code>.</p>

::: info
<p>Key Concept: <code>vector</code>s Grow Efficiently</p>
<p>The standard requires that <code>vector</code> implementations can efficiently add elements at run time. Because <code>vector</code>s grow efficiently, it is often unnecessary—and can result in poorer performance—to define a <code>vector</code> of a specific size. The exception to this rule is if <em>all</em> the elements actually need the same value. If differing element values are needed, it is usually more efficient to define an empty <code>vector</code> and add elements as the values we need become known at run time. Moreover, as we’ll see in § <a href="092-9.4._how_a_vector_grows.html#filepos2347166">9.4</a> (p. <a href="092-9.4._how_a_vector_grows.html#filepos2347166">355</a>), <code>vector</code> offers capabilities to allow us to further enhance run-time performance when we add elements.</p>
<p>Starting with an empty <code>vector</code> and adding elements at run time is distinctly different from how we use built-in arrays in C and in most other languages. In particular, if you are accustomed to using C or Java, you might expect that it would be best to define the <code>vector</code> at its expected size. In fact, the contrary is usually the case.</p>
:::

<h5>Programming Implications of Adding Elements to a <code>vector</code></h5>
<p>The fact that we can easily and efficiently add elements to a <code>vector</code> greatly simplifies many programming tasks. However, this simplicity imposes a new obligation on our programs: We must ensure that any loops we write are correct even if the loop changes the size of the <code>vector</code>.</p>
<p>Other implications that follow from the dynamic nature of <code>vector</code>s will become clearer as we learn more about using them. However, there is one implication that is worth noting already: For reasons we’ll explore in § <a href="057-5.4._iterative_statements.html#filepos1331917">5.4.3</a> (p. <a href="057-5.4._iterative_statements.html#filepos1331917">188</a>), we cannot use a range <code>for</code> if the body of the loop adds elements to the <code>vector</code>.</p>

::: warning
<p>The body of a range <code>for</code> must not change the size of the sequence over which it is iterating.</p>
:::

::: info
<a id="filepos777275"></a><p>Exercises Section 3.3.2</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 3.14:</strong> Write a program to read a sequence of <code>int</code>s from <code>cin</code> and store those values in a <code>vector</code>.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 3.15:</strong> Repeat the previous program but read <code>string</code>s this time.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos778112">3.3.3. Other <code>vector</code> Operations</h4>
<Badge type="info" text="Fundamental" />
<p>In addition to <code>push_back, vector</code> provides only a few other operations, most of which are similar to the corresponding operations on <code>string</code>s. <a href="032-3.3._library_vector_type.html#filepos778838">Table 3.5</a> lists the most important ones.</p>
<p><a id="filepos778838"></a>Table 3.5. <code>vector</code> Operations</p>

| Code                  | Description                                                                                                                              |
|-----------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `v.empty()`           | Returns true if `v` is empty; otherwise returns `false`.                                                                                 |
| `v.size()`            | Returns the number of elements in `v`.                                                                                                   |
| `v.push_back(t)`      | Adds an element with value `t` to end of `v`.                                                                                            |
| `v[n]`                | Returns a reference to the element at position `n` in `v`.                                                                               |
| `v1 = v2`             | Replaces the elements in `v1` with a copy of the elements in `v2`.                                                                       |
| `v1 = {a, b, c, ...}` | Replaces the elements in `v1` with a copy of the elements in the comma-separated list.                                                   |
| `v1 == v2` `v1 != v2` | `v1` and `v2` are equal if they have the same number of elements and each element in `v1` is equal to the corresponding element in `v2`. |
| `<, <=, >, >=`        | Have their normal meanings using dictionary ordering.                                                                                    |

<p>We access the elements of a <code>vector</code> the same way that we access the characters in a <code>string:</code> through their position in the <code>vector</code>. For example, we can use a range <code>for</code> (§ <a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos697807">3.2.3</a>, p. <a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos697807">91</a>) to process all the elements in a <code>vector</code>:</p>

```c++
vector<int> v{1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9};
for (auto &i : v)     // for each element in v (note: i is a reference)
    i *= i;           // square the element value
for (auto i : v)      // for each element in v
    cout << i << " "; // print the element
cout << endl;
```

<p>In the first loop, we define our control variable, <code>i</code>, as a reference so that we can use <code>i</code> to assign new values to the elements in <code>v</code>. We let <code>auto</code> deduce the type of <code>i</code>. This loop uses a new form of the compound assignment operator (§ <a href="014-1.4._flow_of_control.html#filepos166704">1.4.1</a>, p. <a href="014-1.4._flow_of_control.html#filepos166704">12</a>). As we’ve seen, <code>+=</code> adds the right-hand operand to the left and stores the result in the left-hand operand. The <code>*=</code> operator behaves similarly, except that it multiplies the left- and right-hand operands, storing the result in the left-hand one. The second range <code>for</code> prints each element.</p>
<p>The <code>empty</code> and <code>size</code> members behave as do the corresponding <code>string</code> members (§ <a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos659212">3.2.2</a>, p. <a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos659212">87</a>): <code>empty</code> returns a <code>bool</code> indicating whether the <code>vector</code> has any elements, and <code>size</code> returns the number of elements in the <code>vector</code>. The <code>size</code> member returns a value of the <code>size_type</code> defined by the corresponding <code>vector</code> type.</p>

::: info
<p>To use <code>size_type</code>, we must name the type in which it is defined. A <code>vector</code> type <em>always</em> includes its element type (§ <a href="032-3.3._library_vector_type.html#filepos736471">3.3</a>, p. <a href="032-3.3._library_vector_type.html#filepos736471">97</a>):</p>

```c++
vector<int>::size_type // ok
vector::size_type      // error
```

:::

<p>The equality and relational operators have the same behavior as the corresponding <code>string</code> operations (§ <a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos659212">3.2.2</a>, p. <a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos659212">88</a>). Two <code>vector</code>s are equal if they have the same number of elements and if the corresponding elements all have the same value. The relational operators apply a dictionary ordering: If the <code>vector</code>s have differing sizes, but the elements that are in common are equal, then the <code>vector</code> with fewer elements is less than the one with more elements. If the elements have <a id="filepos785262"></a>differing values, then the relationship between the <code>vector</code>s is determined by the relationship between the first elements that differ.</p>
<p>We can compare two <code>vector</code>s only if we can compare the elements in those <code>vector</code>s. Some class types, such as <code>string</code>, define the meaning of the equality and relational operators. Others, such as our <code>Sales_item</code> class, do not. The only operations <code>Sales_item</code> supports are those listed in § <a href="015-1.5._introducing_classes.html#filepos222335">1.5.1</a> (p. <a href="015-1.5._introducing_classes.html#filepos222335">20</a>). Those operations did not include the equality or relational operators. As a result, we cannot compare two <code>vector&lt;Sales_item&gt;</code> objects.</p>
<h5>Computing a <code>vector</code> Index</h5>
<p>We can fetch a given element using the subscript operator (§ <a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos697807">3.2.3</a>, p. <a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos697807">93</a>). As with <code>string</code>s, subscripts for <code>vector</code> start at 0; the type of a subscript is the corresponding <code>size_type</code>; and—assuming the <code>vector</code> is non<code>const</code>—we can write to the element returned by the subscript operator. In addition, as we did in § <a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos697807">3.2.3</a> (p. <a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos697807">95</a>), we can compute an index and directly fetch the element at that position.</p>
<p>As an example, let’s assume that we have a collection of grades that range from 0 through 100. We’d like to count how many grades fall into various clusters of 10. Between zero and 100 there are 101 possible grades. These grades can be represented by 11 clusters: 10 clusters of 10 grades each plus one cluster for the perfect score of 100. The first cluster will count grades of 0 through 9, the second will count grades from 10 through 19, and so on. The final cluster counts how many scores of 100 were achieved.</p>
<p>Clustering the grades this way, if our input is</p>

```
42 65 95 100 39 67 95 76 88 76 83 92 76 93
```

<p>then the output should be</p>

```
0 0 0 1 1 0 2 3 2 4 1
```

<p>which indicates that there were no grades below 30, one grade in the 30s, one in the 40s, none in the 50s, two in the 60s, three in the 70s, two in the 80s, four in the 90s, and one grade of 100.</p>
<p><a id="filepos789121"></a>We’ll use a <code>vector</code> with 11 elements to hold the counters for each cluster. We can determine the cluster index for a given grade by dividing that grade by 10. When we divide two integers, we get an integer in which the fractional part is truncated. For example, 42/10 is 4, 65/10 is 6 and 100/10 is 10. Once we’ve computed the cluster index, we can use it to subscript our <code>vector</code> and fetch the counter we want to increment:</p>

```c++
// count the number of grades by clusters of ten: 0--9, 10--19, . .. 90--99, 100
vector<unsigned> scores(11, 0); // 11 buckets, all initially 0
unsigned grade;
while (cin >> grade) {      // read the grades
    if (grade <= 100)       // handle only valid grades
        ++scores[grade/10]; // increment the counter for the current cluster
}
```

<p>We start by defining a <code>vector</code> to hold the cluster counts. In this case, we do want each element to have the same value, so we allocate all 11 elements, each of which is initialized to <code>0</code>. The <code>while</code> condition reads the grades. Inside the loop, we check that the grade we read has a valid value (i.e., that it is less than or equal to 100). Assuming the grade is valid, we increment the appropriate counter for <code>grade</code>.</p>
<p>The statement that does the increment is a good example of the kind of terse code characteristic of C++ programs. This expression</p>

```c++
++scores[grade/10]; // increment the counter for the current cluster
```

<p>is equivalent to</p>

```c++
auto ind = grade/10; // get the bucket index
scores[ind] = scores[ind] + 1; // increment the count
```

<p>We compute the bucket index by dividing <code>grade</code> by 10 and use the result of the division to index <code>scores</code>. Subscripting <code>scores</code> fetches the appropriate counter for this grade. We increment the value of that element to indicate the occurrence of a score in the given range.</p>
<p>As we’ve seen, when we use a subscript, we should think about how we know that the indices are in range (§ <a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos697807">3.2.3</a>, p. <a href="031-3.2._library_string_type.html#filepos697807">95</a>). In this program, we verify that the input is a valid grade in the range between <code>0</code> and <code>100</code>. Thus, we know that the indices we can compute are between <code>0</code> and <code>10</code>. These indices are between <code>0</code> and <code>scores.size() - 1</code>.</p>
<h5>Subscripting Does Not Add Elements</h5>
<p>Programmers new to C++ sometimes think that subscripting a <code>vector</code> adds elements; it does not. The following code intends to add ten elements to <code>ivec</code>:</p>

```c++
vector<int> ivec;   // empty vector
for (decltype(ivec.size()) ix = 0; ix != 10; ++ix)
    ivec[ix] = ix;  // disaster: ivec has no elements
```

<p>However, it is in error: <code>ivec</code> is an empty <code>vector</code>; there are no elements to subscript! As we’ve seen, the right way to write this loop is to use <code>push_back</code>:</p>
<p><a id="filepos795966"></a></p>

```c++
for (decltype(ivec.size()) ix = 0; ix != 10; ++ix)
    ivec.push_back(ix);  // ok: adds a new element with value ix
```

::: warning
<p>The subscript operator on <code>vector</code> (and <code>string</code>) fetches an existing element; it does <em>not</em> add an element.</p>
:::

::: warning
<p>Caution: Subscript Only Elements that are Known to Exist!</p>
<p>It is crucially important to understand that we may use the subscript operator (the <code>[]</code> operator) to fetch only elements that actually exist. For example,</p>

```c++
vector<int> ivec;      // empty vector
cout << ivec[0];       // error: ivec has no elements!

vector<int> ivec2(10); // vector with ten elements
cout << ivec2[10];     // error: ivec2 has elements 0 . . . 9
```

<p>It is an error to subscript an element that doesn’t exist, but it is an error that the compiler is unlikely to detect. Instead, the value we get at run time is undefined.</p>
<p>Attempting to subscript elements that do not exist is, unfortunately, an extremely common and pernicious programming error. So-called <em><a href="037-defined_terms.html#filepos978379" id="filepos799371">buffer overflow</a></em> errors are the result of subscripting elements that don’t exist. Such bugs are the most common cause of security problems in PC and other applications.</p>
:::
::: tip
<p>A good way to ensure that subscripts are in range is to avoid subscripting altogether by using a range <code>for</code> whenever possible.</p>
:::

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 3.3.3</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 3.16:</strong> Write a program to print the size and contents of the <code>vector</code>s from <a href="032-3.3._library_vector_type.html#filepos765880">exercise 3.13</a>. Check whether your answers to that exercise were correct. If not, restudy § <a href="032-3.3._library_vector_type.html#filepos744172">3.3.1</a> (p. <a href="032-3.3._library_vector_type.html#filepos744172">97</a>) until you understand why you were wrong.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 3.17:</strong> Read a sequence of words from <code>cin</code> and store the values a <code>vector</code>. After you’ve read all the words, process the <code>vector</code> and change each word to uppercase. Print the transformed elements, eight words to a line.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 3.18:</strong> Is the following program legal? If not, how might you fix it?</p>

```c++
vector<int> ivec;
ivec[0] = 42;
```

<p><strong>Exercise 3.19:</strong> List three ways to define a <code>vector</code> and give it ten elements, each with the value 42. Indicate whether there is a preferred way to do so and why.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 3.20:</strong> Read a set of integers into a <code>vector</code>. Print the sum of each pair of adjacent elements. Change your program so that it prints the sum of the first and last elements, followed by the sum of the second and second-to-last, and so on.</p>
:::
