<h3 id="filepos1066463">4.4. Assignment Operators</h3>
<p>The left-hand operand of an assignment operator must be a modifiable lvalue. For example, given</p>

```c++
int i = 0, j = 0, k = 0; // initializations, not assignment
const int ci = i;        // initialization, not assignment
```

<p><a id="filepos1067326"></a>Each of these assignments is illegal:</p>

```c++
1024 = k;      // error: literals are rvalues
i + j = k;     // error: arithmetic expressions are rvalues
ci = k;        // error: ci is a const (nonmodifiable) lvalue
```

<p>The result of an assignment is its left-hand operand, which is an lvalue. The type of the result is the type of the left-hand operand. If the types of the left and right operands differ, the right-hand operand is converted to the type of the left:</p>

```c++
k = 0;          //  result: type int, value 0
k = 3.14159;    //  result: type int, value 3
```

<p>Under the new standard, we can use a braced initializer list (§ <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">2.2.1</a>, p. <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">43</a>) on the right-hand side:</p>
<a id="filepos1069824"></a><Badge type="tip" text="C++11" />

```c++
k = {3.14};                 // error: narrowing conversion
vector<int> vi;             // initially empty
vi = {0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9}; // vi now has ten elements, values 0 through 9
```

<p>If the left-hand operand is of a built-in type, the initializer list may contain at most one value, and that value must not require a narrowing conversion (§ <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">2.2.1</a>, p. <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos350704">43</a>).</p>
<p>For class types, what happens depends on the details of the class. In the case of <code>vector</code>, the <code>vector</code> template defines its own version of an assignment operator that can take an initializer list. This operator replaces the elements of the left-hand side with the elements in the list on the right-hand side.</p>
<p>Regardless of the type of the left-hand operand, the initializer list may be empty. In this case, the compiler generates a value-initialized (§ <a href="032-3.3._library_vector_type.html#filepos744172">3.3.1</a>, p. <a href="032-3.3._library_vector_type.html#filepos744172">98</a>) temporary and assigns that value to the left-hand operand.</p>
<h4>Assignment Is Right Associative</h4>
<p>Unlike the other binary operators, assignment is right associative:</p>

```c++
int ival, jval;
ival = jval = 0; // ok: each assigned 0
```

<p>Because assignment is right associative, the right-most assignment, <code>jval = 0</code>, is the right-hand operand of the left-most assignment operator. Because assignment returns its left-hand operand, the result of the right-most assignment (i.e., <code>jval</code>) is assigned to <code>ival</code>.</p>
<p>Each object in a multiple assignment must have the same type as its right-hand neighbor or a type to which that neighbor can be converted (§ <a href="049-4.11._type_conversions.html#filepos1157818">4.11</a>, p. <a href="049-4.11._type_conversions.html#filepos1157818">159</a>):</p>

```c++
int ival, *pval; // ival is an int; pval is a pointer to int
ival = pval = 0; // error: cannot assign the value of a pointer to an int
string s1, s2;
s1 = s2 = "OK";  // string literal "OK" converted to string
```

<p>The first assignment is illegal because <code>ival</code> and <code>pval</code> have different types and there is no conversion from the type of <code>pval</code> (<code>int*</code>) to the type of <code>ival</code> (<code>int</code>). It is illegal even though zero is a value that can be assigned to either object.</p>
<p><a id="filepos1075562"></a>On the other hand, the second assignment is fine. The string literal is converted to <code>string</code>, and that <code>string</code> is assigned to <code>s2</code>. The result of that assignment is <code>s2</code>, which has the same type as <code>s1</code>.</p>
<h4>Assignment Has Low Precedence</h4>
<p>Assignments often occur in conditions. Because assignment has relatively low precedence, we usually must parenthesize the assignment for the condition to work properly. To see why assignment in a condition is useful, consider the following loop. We want to call a function until it returns a desired value—say, 42:</p>

```c++
// a verbose and therefore more error-prone way to write this loop
int i = get_value();  // get the first value
while (i != 42) {
    // do something ...
    i = get_value();  // get remaining values
}
```

<p>Here we start by calling <code>get_value</code> followed by a loop whose condition uses the value returned from that call. The last statement in this loop makes another call to <code>get_value</code>, and the loop repeats. We can write this code more directly as</p>

```c++
int i;
// a better way to write our loop---what the condition does is now clearer
while ((i = get_value()) != 42) {
    // do something ...
}
```

<p>The condition now more clearly expresses our intent: We want to continue until <code>get_value</code> returns <code>42</code>. The condition executes by assigning the result returned by <code>get_value</code> to <code>i</code> and then comparing the result of that assignment with <code>42</code>.</p>
<p>Without the parentheses, the operands to <code>!=</code> would be the value returned from <code>get_value</code> and <code>42</code>. The <code>true</code> or <code>false</code> result of that test would be assigned to <code>i</code>—clearly not what we intended!</p>

::: info
<p>Because assignment has lower precedence than the relational operators, parentheses are usually needed around assignments in conditions.</p>
:::

<h4>Beware of Confusing Equality and Assignment Operators</h4>
<p>The fact that we can use assignment in a condition can have surprising effects:</p>

```c++
if (i = j)
```

<p>The condition in this <code>if</code> assigns the value of <code>j</code> to <code>i</code> and then tests the result of the assignment. If <code>j</code> is nonzero, the condition will be <code>true</code>. The author of this code almost surely intended to test whether <code>i</code> and <code>j</code> have the same value:</p>

```c++
if (i == j)
```

<p>Bugs of this sort are notoriously difficult to find. Some, but not all, compilers are kind enough to warn about code such as this example.</p>
<h4><a id="filepos1081662"></a>Compound Assignment Operators</h4>
<p>We often apply an operator to an object and then assign the result to that same object. As an example, consider the sum program from § <a href="014-1.4._flow_of_control.html#filepos180866">1.4.2</a> (p. <a href="014-1.4._flow_of_control.html#filepos180866">13</a>):</p>

```c++
int sum = 0;
// sum values from 1 through 10 inclusive
for (int val = 1; val <= 10; ++val)
    sum += val; //  equivalent to sum = sum + val
```

<p>This kind of operation is common not just for addition but for the other arithmetic operators and the bitwise operators, which we cover in § <a href="046-4.8._the_bitwise_operators.html#filepos1120642">4.8</a> (p. <a href="046-4.8._the_bitwise_operators.html#filepos1120642">152</a>). There are compound assignments for each of these operators:</p>

```c++
 +=   -=   *=   /=   %=         // arithmetic operators
<<=  >>=   &=   ^=   |=         // bitwise operators; see § 4.8 (p. 152)
```

<p>Each compound operator is essentially equivalent to</p>

```c++
a = a op b;
```

<p>with the exception that, when we use the compound assignment, the left-hand operand is evaluated only once. If we use an ordinary assignment, that operand is evaluated twice: once in the expression on the right-hand side and again as the operand on the left hand. In many, perhaps most, contexts this difference is immaterial aside from possible performance consequences.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 4.4</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 4.13:</strong> What are the values of <code>i</code> and <code>d</code> after each assignment?</p>

```c++
int i;   double d;
```

<p><strong>(a)</strong>
<code>d = i = 3.5;</code></p>
<p><strong>(b)</strong>
<code>i = d = 3.5;</code></p>
<p><strong>Exercise 4.14:</strong> Explain what happens in each of the <code>if</code> tests:</p>

```c++
if (42 = i)   //  ...
if (i = 42)   //  ...
```

<p><strong>Exercise 4.15:</strong> The following assignment is illegal. Why? How would you correct it?</p>

```c++
double dval; int ival; int *pi;
dval = ival = pi = 0;
```

<p><strong>Exercise 4.16:</strong> Although the following are legal, they probably do not behave as the programmer expects. Why? Rewrite the expressions as you think they should be.</p>
<p><strong>(a)</strong>
<code>if (p = getPtr() != 0)</code></p>
<p><strong>(b)</strong>
<code>if (i = 1024)</code></p>
:::
