<h3 id="filepos1087530">4.5. Increment and Decrement Operators</h3>
<p>The increment (<code>++</code>) and decrement (<code>--</code>) operators provide a convenient notational shorthand for adding or subtracting 1 from an object. This notation rises above <a id="filepos1087957"></a>mere convenience when we use these operators with iterators, because many iterators do not support arithmetic.</p>
<p>There are two forms of these operators: prefix and postfix. So far, we have used only the prefix form. This form increments (or decrements) its operand and yields the <em>changed</em> object as its result. The postfix operators increment (or decrement) the operand but yield a copy of the original, <em>unchanged</em> value as its result:</p>

```c++
int i = 0, j;
j = ++i; // j = 1, i = 1: prefix yields the incremented value
j = i++; // j = 1, i = 2: postfix yields the unincremented value
```

<p>These operators require lvalue operands. The prefix operators return the object itself as an lvalue. The postfix operators return a copy of the object’s original value as an rvalue.</p>

::: info
<p>Advice: Use Postfix Operators only When Necessary</p>
<p>Readers from a C background might be surprised that we use the prefix increment in the programs we’ve written. The reason is simple: The prefix version avoids unnecessary work. It increments the value and returns the incremented version. The postfix operator must store the original value so that it can return the unincremented value as its result. If we don’t need the unincremented value, there’s no need for the extra work done by the postfix operator.</p>
<p>For <code>int</code>s and pointers, the compiler can optimize away this extra work. For more complicated iterator types, this extra work potentially might be more costly. By habitually using the prefix versions, we do not have to worry about whether the performance difference matters. Moreover—and perhaps more importantly—we can express the intent of our programs more directly.</p>
:::

<h4>Combining Dereference and Increment in a Single Expression</h4>
<Badge type="warning" text="Tricky" />
<p>The postfix versions of <code>++</code> and <code>--</code> are used when we want to use the current value of a variable and increment it in a single compound expression.</p>
<p>As one example, we can use postfix increment to write a loop to print the values in a <code>vector</code> up to but not including the first negative value:</p>

```c++
auto pbeg = v.begin();
// print elements up to the first negative value
while (pbeg != v.end() && *beg >= 0)
    cout << *pbeg++ << endl; // print the current value and advance pbeg
```

<p>The expression <code>*pbeg++</code> is usually confusing to programmers new to both C++ and C. However, because this usage pattern is so common, C++ programmers must understand such expressions.</p>
<p>The precedence of postfix increment is higher than that of the dereference operator, so <code>*pbeg++</code> is equivalent to <code>*(pbeg++)</code>. The subexpression <code>pbeg++</code> increments <code>pbeg</code> and yields a copy of the previous value of <code>pbeg</code> as its result. Accordingly, the operand of <code>*</code> is the unincremented value of <code>pbeg</code>. Thus, the statement prints the element to which <code>pbeg</code> originally pointed and increments <code>pbeg</code>.</p>
<p><a id="filepos1093977"></a>This usage relies on the fact that postfix increment returns a copy of its original, unincremented operand. If it returned the incremented value, we’d dereference the incremented value, with disastrous results. We’d skip the first element. Worse, if the sequence had no negative values, we would attempt to dereference one too many elements.</p>

::: info
<p>Advice: Brevity Can Be a Virtue</p>
<p>Expressions such as <code>*pbeg++</code> can be bewildering—at first. However, it is a useful and widely used idiom. Once the notation is familiar, writing</p>

```c++
cout << *iter++ << endl;
```

<p>is easier and less error-prone than the more verbose equivalent</p>

```c++
cout << *iter << endl;
++iter;
```

<p>It is worthwhile to study examples of such code until their meanings are immediately clear. Most C++ programs use succinct expressions rather than more verbose equivalents. Therefore, C++ programmers must be comfortable with such usages. Moreover, once these expressions are familiar, you will find them less error-prone.</p>
:::

<h4>Remember That Operands Can Be Evaluated in Any Order</h4>
<p>Most operators give no guarantee as to the order in which operands will be evaluated (§ <a href="039-4.1._fundamentals.html#filepos1019764">4.1.3</a>, p. <a href="039-4.1._fundamentals.html#filepos1019764">137</a>). This lack of guaranteed order often doesn’t matter. The cases where it does matter are when one subexpression changes the value of an operand that is used in another subexpression. Because the increment and decrement operators change their operands, it is easy to misuse these operators in compound expressions.</p>
<p>To illustrate the problem, we’ll rewrite the loop from § <a href="033-3.4._introducing_iterators.html#filepos804727">3.4.1</a> (p. <a href="033-3.4._introducing_iterators.html#filepos804727">108</a>) that capitalizes the first word in the input. That example used a <code>for</code> loop:</p>

```c++
for (auto it = s.begin(); it != s.end() && !isspace(*it); ++it)
    *it = toupper(*it); // capitalize the current character
```

<p>which allowed us to separate the statement that dereferenced <code>beg</code> from the one that incremented it. Replacing the <code>for</code> with a seemingly equivalent <code>while</code></p>

```c++
// the behavior of the following loop is undefined!
while (beg != s.end() && !isspace(*beg))
    *beg = toupper(*beg++);   // error: this assignment is undefined
```

<p>results in undefined behavior. The problem is that in the revised version, both the left- and right-hand operands to <code>=</code> use <code>beg</code>
<em>and</em> the right-hand operand changes <code>beg</code>. The assignment is therefore undefined. The compiler might evaluate this expression as either</p>

```c++
*beg = toupper(*beg);        // execution if left-hand side is evaluated first
*(beg + 1) = toupper(*beg);  // execution if right-hand side is evaluated first
```

<p>or it might evaluate it in yet some other way.</p>

::: info
<a id="filepos1099695"></a><p>Exercises Section 4.5</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 4.17:</strong> Explain the difference between prefix and postfix increment.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 4.18:</strong> What would happen if the <code>while</code> loop on page <a href="043-4.5._increment_and_decrement_operators.html#filepos1087957">148</a> that prints the elements from a <code>vector</code> used the prefix increment operator?</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 4.19:</strong> Given that <code>ptr</code> points to an <code>int</code>, that <code>vec</code> is a <code>vector&lt;int&gt;</code>, and that <code>ival</code> is an <code>int</code>, explain the behavior of each of these expressions. Which, if any, are likely to be incorrect? Why? How might each be corrected?</p>
<p><strong>(a)</strong>
<code>ptr != 0 &amp;&amp; *ptr++</code></p>
<p><strong>(b)</strong>
<code>ival++ &amp;&amp; ival</code></p>
<p><strong>(c)</strong>
<code>vec[ival++] &lt;= vec[ival]</code></p>
:::
