---
title: 4.7. The Conditional Operator
---

<h3 id="filepos1107527"><a id="filepos1107560"></a>4.7. The Conditional Operator</h3>
<p>The conditional operator (the <a href="052-defined_terms.html#filepos1222855" id="filepos1107697"><code>?:</code>
<strong>operator</strong></a>) lets us embed simple if-else logic inside an expression. The conditional operator has the following form:</p>

```c++
cond  ? expr1  : expr2;
```

<p>where <em>cond</em> is an expression that is used as a condition and <em>expr1</em> and <em>expr2</em> are expressions of the same type (or types that can be converted to a common type). This operator executes by evaluating <em>cond</em>. If the condition is <code>true</code>, then <em>expr1</em> is evaluated; otherwise, <em>expr2</em> is evaluated. As one example, we can use a conditional operator to determine whether a grade is pass or fail:</p>

```c++
string finalgrade = (grade < 60) ? "fail" : "pass";
```

<p>The condition checks whether <code>grade</code> is less than <code>60</code>. If so, the result of the expression is <code>"fail"</code>; otherwise the result is <code>"pass"</code>. Like the logical <small>AND</small> and logical <small>OR</small> (<code>&amp;&amp;</code> and <code>||</code>) operators, the conditional operator guarantees that only one of <em>expr1</em> or <em>expr2</em> is evaluated.</p>
<p>That result of the conditional operator is an lvalue if both expressions are lvalues or if they convert to a common lvalue type. Otherwise the result is an rvalue.</p>
<h4>Nesting Conditional Operations</h4>
<p>We can nest one conditional operator inside another. That is, the conditional operator can be used as the <em>cond</em> or as one or both of the <em>expr</em>s of another conditional expression. As an example, we’ll use a pair of nested conditionals to perform a three-way test to indicate whether a grade is a high pass, an ordinary pass, or fail:</p>

```c++
finalgrade = (grade > 90) ? "high pass"
                          : (grade < 60) ? "fail" : "pass";
```

<p>The first condition checks whether the grade is above <code>90</code>. If so, the expression after the <code>?</code> is evaluated, which yields <code>"high pass"</code>. If the condition fails, the <code>:</code> branch is executed, which is itself another conditional expression. This conditional asks whether the <code>grade</code> is less than <code>60</code>. If so, the <code>?</code> branch is evaluated and yields <code>"fail"</code>. If not, the <code>:</code> branch returns <code>"pass"</code>.</p>
<p>The conditional operator is right associative, meaning (as usual) that the operands group right to left. Associativity accounts for the fact that the right-hand conditional—the one that compares <code>grade</code> to <code>60</code>—forms the <code>:</code> branch of the left-hand conditional expression.</p>

::: warning
<p>Nested conditionals quickly become unreadable. It’s a good idea to nest no more than two or three.</p>
:::

<h4>Using a Conditional Operator in an Output Expression</h4>
<p>The conditional operator has fairly low precedence. When we embed a conditional expression in a larger expression, we usually must parenthesize the conditional subexpression. For example, we often use the conditional operator to print one or <a id="filepos1113649"></a>another value, depending on the result of a condition. An incompletely parenthesized conditional operator in an output expression can have surprising results:</p>

```c++
cout << ((grade < 60) ?   "fail" : "pass"); // prints pass or  fail
cout << (grade < 60) ?   "fail" : "pass";   // prints 1 or 0!
cout << grade < 60 ?   "fail" : "pass"; //  error: compares cout to 60
```

<p>The second expression uses the comparison between <code>grade</code> and <code>60</code> as the operand to the <code>&lt;&lt;</code> operator. The value <code>1</code> or <code>0</code> is printed, depending on whether <code>grade &lt; 60</code> is true or false. The <code>&lt;&lt;</code> operator returns <code>cout</code>, which is tested as the condition for the conditional operator. That is, the second expression is equivalent to</p>

```c++
cout << (grade < 60);    // prints 1 or 0
cout ?  "fail" : "pass"; // test cout and then yield one of the two literals
                         // depending on whether cout is true or false
```

<p>The last expression is an error because it is equivalent to</p>

```c++
cout << grade;   // less-than has lower precedence than shift, so print grade first
cout < 60 ? "fail" : "pass"; // then compare cout to 60!
```

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 4.7</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 4.21:</strong> Write a program to use a conditional operator to find the elements in a <code>vector&lt;int&gt;</code> that have odd value and double the value of each such element.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 4.22:</strong> Extend the program that assigned high pass, pass, and fail grades to also assign low pass for grades between 60 and 75 inclusive. Write two versions: One version that uses only conditional operators; the other should use one or more <code>if</code> statements. Which version do you think is easier to understand and why?</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 4.23:</strong> The following expression fails to compile due to operator precedence. Using Table 4.12 (p. <a href="050-4.12._operator_precedence_table.html#filepos1211317">166</a>), explain why it fails. How would you fix it?</p>

```c++
string s = "word";
string pl = s + s[s.size() - 1] == 's' ? "" : "s" ;
```

<p><strong>Exercise 4.24:</strong> Our program that distinguished between high pass, pass, and fail depended on the fact that the conditional operator is right associative. Describe how that operator would be evaluated if the operator were left associative.</p>
:::
