---
title: 4.9. The sizeof Operator
---

<h3 id="filepos1142429">4.9. The <code>sizeof</code> Operator</h3>
<p>The <code>sizeof</code> operator returns the size, in bytes, of an expression or a type name. The operator is right associative. The result of <code>sizeof</code> is a constant expression (§ <a href="024-2.4._const_qualifier.html#filepos520427">2.4.4</a>, p. <a href="024-2.4._const_qualifier.html#filepos520427">65</a>) of type <code>size_t</code> (§ <a href="034-3.5._arrays.html#filepos873638">3.5.2</a>, p. <a href="034-3.5._arrays.html#filepos873638">116</a>). The operator takes one of two forms:</p>

```c++
sizeof (type)
sizeof expr
```

<p>In the second form, <code>sizeof</code> returns the size of the type returned by the given expression. The <code>sizeof</code> operator is unusual in that it does not evaluate its operand:</p>
<p><a id="filepos1144067"></a></p>

```c++
Sales_data data, *p;
sizeof(Sales_data); // size required to hold an object of type Sales_data
sizeof data; // size of data's type, i.e., sizeof(Sales_data)
sizeof p;    // size of a pointer
sizeof *p;   // size of the type to which p points, i.e., sizeof(Sales_data)
sizeof data.revenue; // size of the type of Sales_data's revenue member
sizeof Sales_data::revenue; // alternative way to get the size of revenue
```

<p>The most interesting of these examples is <code>sizeof *p</code>. First, because <code>sizeof</code> is right associative and has the same precedence as <code>*</code>, this expression groups right to left. That is, it is equivalent to <code>sizeof (*p)</code>. Second, because <code>sizeof</code> does not evaluate its operand, it doesn’t matter that <code>p</code> is an invalid (i.e., uninitialized) pointer (§ <a href="023-2.3._compound_types.html#filepos409391">2.3.2</a>, p. <a href="023-2.3._compound_types.html#filepos409391">52</a>). Dereferencing an invalid pointer as the operand to <code>sizeof</code> is safe because the pointer is not actually used. <code>sizeof</code> doesn’t need dereference the pointer to know what type it will return.</p>
<p>Under the new standard, we can use the scope operator to ask for the size of a member of a class type. Ordinarily we can only access the members of a class through an object of that type. We don’t need to supply an object, because <code>sizeof</code> does not need to fetch the member to know its size.</p>
<a id="filepos1147517"></a><Badge type="tip" text="C++11" />
<p>The result of applying <code>sizeof</code> depends in part on the type involved:</p>
<ul><li><code>sizeof char</code> or an expression of type <code>char</code> is guaranteed to be 1.</li><li><code>sizeof</code> a reference type returns the size of an object of the referenced type.</li><li><code>sizeof</code> a pointer returns the size needed hold a pointer.</li><li><code>sizeof</code> a dereferenced pointer returns the size of an object of the type to which the pointer points; the pointer need not be valid.</li><li><code>sizeof</code> an array is the size of the entire array. It is equivalent to taking the <code>sizeof</code> the element type times the number of elements in the array. Note that <code>sizeof</code> does not convert the array to a pointer.</li><li><code>sizeof</code> a <code>string</code> or a <code>vector</code> returns only the size of the fixed part of these types; it does not return the size used by the object’s elements.</li></ul>

<p>Because <code>sizeof</code> returns the size of the entire array, we can determine the number of elements in an array by dividing the array size by the element size:</p>

```c++
// sizeof(ia)/sizeof(*ia) returns the number of elements in ia
constexpr size_t sz = sizeof(ia)/sizeof(*ia);
int arr2[sz];  // ok sizeof returns a constant expression § 2.4.4 (p. 65)
```

<p>Because <code>sizeof</code> returns a constant expression, we can use the result of a <code>sizeof</code> expression to specify the dimension of an array.</p>
