---
title: 5.5. Jump Statements
---

<h3 id="filepos1350645">5.5. Jump Statements</h3>
<p>Jump statements interrupt the flow of execution. C++ offers four jumps: <code>break</code>, <code>continue</code>, and <code>goto</code>, which we cover in this chapter, and the <code>return</code> statement, which we’ll describe in § <a href="065-6.3._return_types_and_the_return_statement.html#filepos1548761">6.3</a> (p. <a href="065-6.3._return_types_and_the_return_statement.html#filepos1548761">222</a>).</p>
<h4 id="filepos1351310">5.5.1. The <code>break</code> Statement</h4>
<p>A <a href="061-defined_terms.html#filepos1400831" id="filepos1351569"><code>break</code>
<strong>statement</strong></a> terminates the nearest enclosing <code>while</code>, <code>do while</code>, <code>for</code>, or <code>switch</code> statement. Execution resumes at the statement immediately following the terminated statement.</p>
<p>A <code>break</code> can appear only within an iteration statement or <code>switch</code> statement (including inside statements or blocks nested inside such loops). A <code>break</code> affects only the nearest enclosing loop or <code>switch</code>:</p>

```c++
string buf;
while (cin >> buf && !buf.empty()) {
    switch(buf[0]) {
    case '-':
        // process up to the first blank
        for (auto it = buf.begin()+1; it != buf.end(); ++it) {
              if (*it == ' ')
                   break; // #1, leaves the for loop
              // . . .
        }
        // break #1 transfers control here
        // remaining '-' processing:
        break; // #2, leaves the switch statement

    case '+':
        // . . .
    } // end switch
   // end of switch: break #2 transfers control here
} // end while
```

<p>The <code>break</code> labeled #1 terminates the <code>for</code> loop that follows the hyphen <code>case</code> label. It does not terminate the enclosing <code>switch</code> statement and in fact does not even terminate the processing for the current case. Processing continues with the first statement following the <code>for</code>, which might be additional code to handle a hyphen or the <code>break</code> that completes that section.</p>
<p>The <code>break</code> labeled #2 terminates the <code>switch</code> but does not terminate the enclosing <code>while</code> loop. Processing continues after that <code>break</code> by executing the condition in the <code>while</code>.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 5.5.1</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 5.20:</strong> Write a program to read a sequence of <code>string</code>s from the standard input until either the same word occurs twice in succession or all the words have been read. Use a <code>while</code> loop to read the text one word at a time. Use the <code>break</code> statement to terminate the loop if a word occurs twice in succession. Print the word if it occurs twice in succession, or else print a message saying that no word was repeated.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos1357782">5.5.2. The <code>continue</code> Statement</h4>
<p>A <a href="061-defined_terms.html#filepos1402642" id="filepos1358044"><code>continue</code>
<strong>statement</strong></a> terminates the current iteration of the nearest enclosing loop and immediately begins the next iteration. A <code>continue</code> can appear only inside a <code>for</code>, <code>while</code>, or <code>do while</code> loop, including inside statements or blocks nested inside such loops. Like the <code>break</code> statement, a <code>continue</code> inside a nested loop affects only the nearest enclosing loop. Unlike a <code>break</code>, a <code>continue</code> may appear inside a <code>switch</code> only if that <code>switch</code> is embedded inside an iterative statement.</p>
<p>A <code>continue</code> interrupts the current iteration; execution stays inside the loop. In the case of a <code>while</code> or a <code>do while</code>, execution continues by evaluating the condition. In a traditional <code>for</code> loop, execution continues at the <em>expression</em> inside the <code>for</code> header. In a range <code>for</code>, execution continues by initializing the control variable from the next element in the sequence.</p>
<p>For example, the following loop reads the standard input one word at a time. Only words that begin with an underscore will be processed. For any other value, we terminate the current iteration and get the next input:</p>

```c++
string buf;
while (cin >> buf && !buf.empty()) {
    if (buf[0] != '_')
        continue; // get another input
    // still here? the input starts with an underscore; process buf . . .
}
```

::: info
<a id="filepos1361264"></a><p>Exercises Section 5.5.2</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 5.21:</strong> Revise the program from the exercise in § <a href="058-5.5._jump_statements.html#filepos1351310">5.5.1</a> (p. <a href="058-5.5._jump_statements.html#filepos1351310">191</a>) so that it looks only for duplicated words that start with an uppercase letter.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos1361778">5.5.3. The <code>goto</code> Statement</h4>
<Badge type="danger" text="Advanced" />
<p>A <a href="061-defined_terms.html#filepos1407378" id="filepos1362096"><code>goto</code>
<strong>statement</strong></a> provides an unconditional jump from the <code>goto</code> to a another statement in the same function.</p>

::: tip
<p>Best Practices</p>
<p>Programs should not use <code>goto</code>s. <code>goto</code>s make programs hard to understand and hard to modify.</p>
:::

<p>The syntactic form of a <code>goto</code> statement is</p>

```c++
goto label;
```

<p>where <em>label</em> is an identifier that identifies a statement. A <strong><a href="061-defined_terms.html#filepos1408774" id="filepos1363528">labeled statement</a></strong> is any statement that is preceded by an identifier followed by a colon:</p>

```c++
end: return;  // labeled statement; may be the target of a goto
```

<p>Label identifiers are independent of names used for variables and other identifiers. Hence, a label may have the same identifier as another entity in the program without interfering with the other uses of that identifier. The <code>goto</code> and the labeled statement to which it transfers control must be in the same function.</p>
<p>As with a <code>switch</code> statement, a <code>goto</code> cannot transfer control from a point where an initialized variable is out of scope to a point where that variable is in scope:</p>

```c++
    // . . .
    goto end;
    int ix = 10; // error: goto bypasses an initialized variable definition
end:
    // error: code here could use ix but the goto bypassed its declaration
    ix = 42;
```

<p>A jump backward over an already executed definition is okay. Jumping back to a point before a variable is defined destroys the variable and constructs it again:</p>

```c++
// backward jump over an initialized variable definition is okay
  begin:
    int sz = get_size();
    if (sz <= 0) {
          goto begin;
    }
```

<p>Here <code>sz</code> is destroyed when the <code>goto</code> executes. It is defined and initialized anew when control passes back through its definition after the jump back to <code>begin</code>.</p>

::: info
<a id="filepos1367472"></a><p>Exercises Section 5.5.3</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 5.22:</strong> The last example in this section that jumped back to <code>begin</code> could be better written using a loop. Rewrite the code to eliminate the <code>goto</code>.</p>
:::
