---
title: 6.5. Features for Specialized Uses
---

<h3 id="filepos1630575"><a id="filepos1630608"></a>6.5. Features for Specialized Uses</h3>
<p>In this section we’ll cover three function-related features that are useful in many, but not all, programs: default arguments, inline and <code>constexpr</code> functions, and some facilities that are often used during debugging.</p>
<h4 id="filepos1631032">6.5.1. Default Arguments</h4>
<p>Some functions have parameters that are given a particular value in most, but not all, calls. In such cases, we can declare that common value as a <strong><a href="071-defined_terms.html#filepos1732298" id="filepos1631313">default argument</a></strong> for the function. Functions with default arguments can be called with or without that argument.</p>
<p>For example, we might use a <code>string</code> to represent the contents of a window. By default, we might want the window to have a particular height, width, and background character. However, we might also want to allow users to pass values other than the defaults. To accommodate both default and specified values we would declare our function to define the window as follows:</p>

```c++
typedef string::size_type sz;  // typedef see § 2.5.1 (p. 67)
string screen(sz ht = 24, sz wid = 80, char backgrnd = ' ');
```

<p>Here we’ve provided a default for each parameter. A default argument is specified as an initializer for a parameter in the parameter list. We may define defaults for one or more parameters. However, if a parameter has a default argument, all the parameters that follow it must also have default arguments.</p>
<h5>Calling Functions with Default Arguments</h5>
<p>If we want to use the default argument, we omit that argument when we call the function. Because <code>screen</code> provides defaults for all of its parameters, we can call <code>screen</code> with zero, one, two, or three arguments:</p>

```c++
string window;
window = screen();  // equivalent to screen(24,80,' ')
window = screen(66);// equivalent to screen(66,80,' ')
window = screen(66, 256);      // screen(66,256,' ')
window = screen(66, 256, '#'); // screen(66,256,'#')
```

<p>Arguments in the call are resolved by position. The default arguments are used for the trailing (right-most) arguments of a call. For example, to override the default for <code>background</code>, we must also supply arguments for <code>height</code> and <code>width</code>:</p>

```c++
window = screen(, , '?'); // error: can omit only trailing arguments
window = screen('?');     // calls screen('?',80,' ')
```

<p>Note that the second call, which passes a single character value, is legal. Although legal, it is unlikely to be what was intended. The call is legal because <code>'?'</code> is a <code>char</code>, and a <code>char</code> can be converted (§ <a href="049-4.11._type_conversions.html#filepos1162796">4.11.1</a>, p. <a href="049-4.11._type_conversions.html#filepos1162796">160</a>) to the type of the left-most parameter. That parameter is <code>string::size_type</code>, which is an <code>unsigned</code> integral type. In this call, the <code>char</code> argument is implicitly converted to <code>string::size_type</code>, <a id="filepos1636480"></a>and is passed as the argument to <code>height</code>. On our machine, <code>'?'</code> has the hexadecimal value <code>0x3F</code>, which is decimal <code>63</code>. Thus, this call passes <code>63</code> to the <code>height</code> parameter.</p>
<p>Part of the work of designing a function with default arguments is ordering the parameters so that those least likely to use a default value appear first and those most likely to use a default appear last.</p>
<h5>Default Argument Declarations</h5>
<p>Although it is normal practice to declare a function once inside a header, it is legal to redeclare a function multiple times. However, each parameter can have its default specified only once in a given scope. Thus, any subsequent declaration can add a default only for a parameter that has not previously had a default specified. As usual, defaults can be specified only if all parameters to the right already have defaults. For example, given</p>

```c++
// no default for the height or width parameters
string screen(sz, sz, char = ' ');
```

<p>we cannot change an already declared default value:</p>

```c++
string screen(sz, sz, char = '*'); // error: redeclaration
```

<p>but we can add a default argument as follows:</p>

```c++
string screen(sz = 24, sz = 80, char);  // ok: adds default arguments
```

::: tip
<p>Best Practices</p>
<p>Default arguments ordinarily should be specified with the function declaration in an appropriate header.</p>
:::

<h5>Default Argument Initializers</h5>
<p>Local variables may not be used as a default argument. Excepting that restriction, a default argument can be any expression that has a type that is convertible to the type of the parameter:</p>

```c++
// the declarations of wd, def, and ht must appear outside a function
sz wd = 80;

char def = ' ';
sz ht();
string screen(sz = ht(), sz = wd, char = def);
string window = screen(); // calls screen(ht(), 80, ' ')
```

<p>Names used as default arguments are resolved in the scope of the function declaration. The value that those names represent is evaluated at the time of the call:</p>

```c++
void f2()
{
    def =   '*';   // changes the value of a default argument
    sz wd = 100; // hides the outer definition of wd but does not change the default
    window = screen(); // calls screen(ht(), 80, '*')
}
```

<p><a id="filepos1642657"></a>Inside <code>f2</code>, we changed the value of <code>def</code>. The call to <code>screen</code> passes this updated value. Our function also declared a local variable that hides the outer <code>wd</code>. However, the local named <code>wd</code> is unrelated to the default argument passed to <code>screen</code>.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 6.5.1</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 6.40:</strong> Which, if either, of the following declarations are errors? Why?</p>
<p><strong>(a)</strong>
<code>int ff(int a, int b = 0, int c = 0);</code></p>
<p><strong>(b)</strong>
<code>char *init(int ht = 24, int wd, char bckgrnd);</code></p>
<p><strong>Exercise 6.41:</strong> Which, if any, of the following calls are illegal? Why? Which, if any, are legal but unlikely to match the programmer’s intent? Why?</p>

```c++
char *init(int ht, int wd = 80, char bckgrnd = ' ');
```

<p><strong>(a)</strong>
<code>init();</code></p>
<p><strong>(b)</strong>
<code>init(24,10);</code></p>
<p><strong>(c)</strong>
<code>init(14, '*');</code></p>
<p><strong>Exercise 6.42:</strong> Give the second parameter of <code>make_plural</code> (§ <a href="065-6.3._return_types_and_the_return_statement.html#filepos1552941">6.3.2</a>, p. <a href="065-6.3._return_types_and_the_return_statement.html#filepos1552941">224</a>) a default argument of <code>'s'</code>. Test your program by printing singular and plural versions of the words <code>success</code> and <code>failure</code>.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos1645920">6.5.2. Inline and <code>constexpr</code> Functions</h4>
<p>In § <a href="065-6.3._return_types_and_the_return_statement.html#filepos1552941">6.3.2</a> (p. <a href="065-6.3._return_types_and_the_return_statement.html#filepos1552941">224</a>) we wrote a small function that returned a reference to the shorter of its two <code>string</code> parameters. The benefits of defining a function for such a small operation include the following:</p>
<ul><li>It is easier to read and understand a call to <code>shorterString</code> than it would be to read and understand the equivalent conditional expression.</li><li>Using a function ensures uniform behavior. Each test is guaranteed to be done the same way.</li><li>If we need to change the computation, it is easier to change the function than to find and change every occurrence of the equivalent expression.</li><li>The function can be reused rather than rewritten for other applications.</li></ul>

<p>There is, however, one potential drawback to making <code>shorterString</code> a function: Calling a function is apt to be slower than evaluating the equivalent expression. On most machines, a function call does a lot of work: Registers are saved before the call and restored after the return; arguments may be copied; and the program branches to a new location.</p>
<h5><code>inline</code> Functions Avoid Function Call Overhead</h5>
<p>A function specified as <code>inline</code> (usually) is expanded “in line” at each call. If <code>shorterString</code> were defined as <code>inline</code>, then this call</p>
<p><a id="filepos1648710"></a></p>

```c++
cout << shorterString(s1, s2) << endl;
```

<p>(probably) would be expanded during compilation into something like</p>

```c++
cout << (s1.size() < s2.size() ? s1 : s2) << endl;
```

<p>The run-time overhead of making <code>shorterString</code> a function is thus removed.</p>
<p>We can define <code>shorterString</code> as an inline function by putting the keyword <code>inline</code> before the function’s return type:</p>

```c++
// inline version: find the shorter of two strings
inline const string &
shorterString(const string &s1, const string &s2)
{
        return s1.size() <= s2.size() ? s1 : s2;
}
```

::: info
<p>The <code>inline</code> specification is only a <em>request</em> to the compiler. The compiler may choose to ignore this request.</p>
:::

<p>In general, the <code>inline</code> mechanism is meant to optimize small, straight-line functions that are called frequently. Many compilers will not inline a recursive function. A 75-line function will almost surely not be expanded inline.</p>
<h5><code>constexpr</code> Functions</h5>
<a id="filepos1651836"></a><Badge type="tip" text="C++11" />
<p>A <code>constexpr</code>
<strong>function</strong> is a function that can be used in a constant expression (§ <a href="024-2.4._const_qualifier.html#filepos520427">2.4.4</a>, p. <a href="024-2.4._const_qualifier.html#filepos520427">65</a>). A <code>constexpr</code> function is defined like any other function but must meet certain restrictions: The <code>return</code> type and the type of each parameter in a must be a literal type (§ <a href="024-2.4._const_qualifier.html#filepos520427">2.4.4</a>, p. <a href="024-2.4._const_qualifier.html#filepos520427">66</a>), and the function body must contain exactly one <code>return</code> statement:</p>

```c++
constexpr int new_sz() { return 42; }
constexpr int foo = new_sz();  // ok: foo is a constant expression
```

<p>Here we defined <code>new_sz</code> as a <code>constexpr</code> that takes no arguments. The compiler can verify—at compile time—that a call to <code>new_sz</code> returns a constant expression, so we can use <code>new_sz</code> to initialize our <code>constexpr</code> variable, <code>foo</code>.</p>
<p>When it can do so, the compiler will replace a call to a <code>constexpr</code> function with its resulting value. In order to be able to expand the function immediately, <code>constexpr</code> functions are implicitly <code>inline</code>.</p>
<p>A <code>constexpr</code> function body may contain other statements so long as those statements generate no actions at run time. For example, a <code>constexpr</code> function may contain null statements, type aliases (§ <a href="025-2.5._dealing_with_types.html#filepos536134">2.5.1</a>, p. <a href="025-2.5._dealing_with_types.html#filepos536134">67</a>), and <code>using</code> declarations.</p>
<p>A <code>constexpr</code> function is permitted to return a value that is not a constant:</p>

```c++
// scale(arg) is a constant expression if arg is a constant expression
constexpr size_t scale(size_t cnt) { return new_sz() * cnt; }
```

<p>The <code>scale</code> function will return a constant expression if its argument is a constant expression but not otherwise:</p>
<p><a id="filepos1656240"></a></p>

```c++
int arr[scale(2)]; // ok: scale(2) is a constant expression
int i = 2;         // i is not a constant expression
int a2[scale(i)];  // error: scale(i) is not a constant expression
```

<p>When we pass a constant expression—such as the literal <code>2</code>—then the return is a constant expression. In this case, the compiler will replace the call to <code>scale</code> with the resulting value.</p>
<p>If we call <code>scale</code> with an expression that is not a constant expression—such as on the <code>int</code> object <code>i</code>—then the return is not a constant expression. If we use <code>scale</code> in a context that requires a constant expression, the compiler checks that the result is a constant expression. If it is not, the compiler will produce an error message.</p>

::: info
<p>A <code>constexpr</code> function is not required to return a constant expression.</p>
:::

<h5>Put <code>inline</code> and <code>constexpr</code> Functions in Header Files</h5>
<p>Unlike other functions, <code>inline</code> and <code>constexpr</code> functions may be defined multiple times in the program. After all, the compiler needs the definition, not just the declaration, in order to expand the code. However, all of the definitions of a given <code>inline</code> or <code>constexpr</code> must match exactly. As a result, <code>inline</code> and <code>constexpr</code> functions normally are defined in headers.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 6.5.2</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 6.43:</strong> Which one of the following declarations and definitions would you put in a header? In a source file? Explain why.</p>
<p><strong>(a)</strong>
<code>inline bool eq(const BigInt&amp;, const BigInt&amp;) {...}</code></p>
<p><strong>(b)</strong>
<code>void putValues(int *arr, int size);</code></p>
<p><strong>Exercise 6.44:</strong> Rewrite the <code>isShorter</code> function from § <a href="064-6.2._argument_passing.html#filepos1462468">6.2.2</a> (p. <a href="064-6.2._argument_passing.html#filepos1462468">211</a>) to be <code>inline</code>.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 6.45:</strong> Review the programs you’ve written for the earlier exercises and decide whether they should be defined as <code>inline</code>. If so, do so. If not, explain why they should not be <code>inline</code>.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 6.46:</strong> Would it be possible to define <code>isShorter</code> as a <code>constexpr</code>? If so, do so. If not, explain why not.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos1661988">6.5.3. Aids for Debugging</h4>
<p>C++ programmers sometimes use a technique similar to header guards (§ <a href="026-2.6._defining_our_own_data_structures.html#filepos600691">2.6.3</a>, p. <a href="026-2.6._defining_our_own_data_structures.html#filepos600691">77</a>) to conditionally execute debugging code. The idea is that the program will contain debugging code that is executed only while the program is being developed. When the application is completed and ready to ship, the debugging code is turned off. This approach uses two preprocessor facilities: <code>assert</code> and <code>NDEBUG</code>.</p>
<h5><a id="filepos1662757"></a>The <code>assert</code> Preprocessor Macro</h5>
<p><code>assert</code> is a <strong><a href="071-defined_terms.html#filepos1738863" id="filepos1663185">preprocessor macro</a></strong>. A preprocessor macro is a preprocessor variable that acts somewhat like an inline function. The <code>assert</code> macro takes a single expression, which it uses as a condition:</p>

```c++
assert(expr);
```

<p>evaluates <em>expr</em> and if the expression is false (i.e., zero), then <code>assert</code> writes a message and terminates the program. If the expression is true (i.e., is nonzero), then <code>assert</code> does nothing.</p>
<p>The <code>assert</code> macro is defined in the <code>cassert</code> header. As we’ve seen, preprocessor names are managed by the preprocessor not the compiler (§ <a href="023-2.3._compound_types.html#filepos409391">2.3.2</a>, p. <a href="023-2.3._compound_types.html#filepos409391">54</a>). As a result, we use preprocessor names directly and do not provide a <code>using</code> declaration for them. That is, we refer to <code>assert</code>, not <code>std::assert</code>, and provide no <code>using</code> declaration for <code>assert</code>.</p>
<p>As with preprocessor variables, macro names must be unique within the program. Programs that include the <code>cassert</code> header may not define a variable, function, or other entity named <code>assert</code>. In practice, it is a good idea to avoid using the name <code>assert</code> for our own purposes even if we don’t include <code>cassert</code>. Many headers include the <code>cassert</code> header, which means that even if you don’t directly include that file, your programs are likely to have it included anyway.</p>
<p>The <code>assert</code> macro is often used to check for conditions that “cannot happen.” For example, a program that does some manipulation of input text might know that all words it is given are always longer than a threshold. That program might contain a statement such as</p>

```c++
assert(word.size() > threshold);
```

<h5>The <code>NDEBUG</code> Preprocessor Variable</h5>
<p>The behavior of <code>assert</code> depends on the status of a preprocessor variable named <code>NDEBUG</code>. If <code>NDEBUG</code> is defined, <code>assert</code> does nothing. By default, <code>NDEBUG</code> is <em>not</em> defined, so, by default, <code>assert</code> performs a run-time check.</p>
<p>We can “turn off” debugging by providing a <code>#define</code> to define <code>NDEBUG</code>. Alternatively, most compilers provide a command-line option that lets us define preprocessor variables:</p>

```shellscript
$ CC -D NDEBUG main.C  # use /D with the Microsoft compiler
```

<p>has the same effect as writing <code>#define NDEBUG</code> at the beginning of <code>main.C</code>.</p>
<p>If <code>NDEBUG</code> is defined, we avoid the potential run-time overhead involved in checking various conditions. Of course, there is also no run-time check. Therefore, <code>assert</code> should be used only to verify things that truly should not be possible. It can be useful as an aid in getting a program debugged but should not be used to substitute for run-time logic checks or error checking that the program should do.</p>
<p>In addition to using <code>assert</code>, we can write our own conditional debugging code using <code>NDEBUG</code>. If <code>NDEBUG</code> is <em>not</em> defined, the code between the <code>#ifndef</code> and the <code>#endif</code> is executed. If <code>NDEBUG</code>
<em>is</em> defined, that code is ignored:</p>
<p><a id="filepos1669800"></a></p>

```c++
void print(const int ia[], size_t size)
{
#ifndef NDEBUG
// _ _func_ _ is a local static defined by the compiler that holds the function's name
cerr << _ _func_ _ << ": array size is " << size << endl;
#endif
// ...
```

<p>Here we use a variable named <code>_ _func_ _</code> to print the name of the function we are debugging. The compiler defines <code>_ _func_ _</code> in every function. It is a local <code>static</code> array of <code>const char</code> that holds the name of the function.</p>
<p>In addition to <code>_ _func_ _</code>, which the C++ compiler defines, the preprocessor defines four other names that can be useful in debugging:</p>

::: info
<p><code>_ _FILE_ _</code> string literal containing the name of the file</p>
:::

::: info
<p><code>_ _LINE_ _</code> integer literal containing the current line number</p>
:::

::: info
<p><code>_ _TIME_ _</code> string literal containing the time the file was compiled</p>
:::

::: info
<p><code>_ _DATE_ _</code> string literal containing the date the file was compiled</p>
:::

<p>We might use these constants to report additional information in error messages:</p>

```c++
if (word.size() < threshold)
    cerr << "Error: " << _ _FILE_ _
         << " : in function " << _ _func_ _
         << " at line " << _ _LINE_ _ << endl
         << "       Compiled on " << _ _DATE_ _
         << " at " << _ _TIME_ _ << endl
         << "       Word read was \"" << word
         << "\":  Length too short" << endl;
```

<p>If we give this program a <code>string</code> that is shorter than the <code>threshold</code>, then the following error message will be generated:</p>

```
Error: wdebug.cc : in function main at line 27
       Compiled on Jul 11 2012 at 20:50:03
       Word read was "foo":  Length too short
```
