<h3 id="filepos1729163">Defined Terms</h3><ul><li><p><a href="066-6.4._overloaded_functions.html#filepos1620078" id="filepos1729302"><strong>ambiguous call</strong></a> Compile-time error that results during function matching when two or more functions provide an equally good match for a call.</p></li><li><p><a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1416722" id="filepos1729604"><strong>arguments</strong></a> Values supplied in a function call that are used to initialize the function’s parameters.</p></li><li><p><a href="067-6.5._features_for_specialized_uses.html#filepos1663079" id="filepos1729871"><strong>assert</strong></a> Preprocessor macro that takes a single expression, which it uses as a condition. When the preprocessor variable <code>NDEBUG</code> is not defined, <code>assert</code> evaluates the condition and, if the condition is false, writes a message and terminates the program.</p></li><li><p><a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1436168" id="filepos1730408"><strong>automatic objects</strong></a> Objects that exist only during the execution of a function. They are created when control passes through their definition and are destroyed at the end of the block in which they are defined.</p></li><li><p><a href="066-6.4._overloaded_functions.html#filepos1619408" id="filepos1730778"><strong>best match</strong></a> Function selected from a set of overloaded functions for a call. If a best match exists, the selected function is a better match than all the other viable candidates for at least one argument in the call and is no worse on the rest of the arguments.</p></li><li><p><strong>call by reference</strong> See pass by reference.</p></li><li><p><strong>call by value</strong> See pass by value.</p></li><li><p><a href="068-6.6._function_matching.html#filepos1677543" id="filepos1731522"><strong>candidate functions</strong></a> Set of functions that are considered when resolving a function call. The candidate functions are all the functions with the name used in the call for which a declaration is in scope at the time of the call.</p></li><li><p><a href="067-6.5._features_for_specialized_uses.html#filepos1652012" id="filepos1731910"><strong>constexpr</strong></a> Function that may return a constant expression. A <code>constexpr</code> function is implicitly <code>inline</code>.</p></li><li><p><a href="067-6.5._features_for_specialized_uses.html#filepos1631313" id="filepos1732298"><strong>default argument</strong></a> Value specified to be used when an argument is omitted in a call to the function.</p></li><li><p><a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1447685" id="filepos1732558"><strong>executable file</strong></a> File, which the operating system executes, that contains code corresponding to our program.</p></li><li><p><a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1415768" id="filepos1732827"><strong>function</strong></a> Callable unit of computation.</p></li><li><p><a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1416341" id="filepos1733027"><strong>function body</strong></a> Block that defines the actions of a function.</p></li><li><p><a href="066-6.4._overloaded_functions.html#filepos1617783" id="filepos1733248"><strong>function matching</strong></a> Compiler process by which a call to an overloaded function is resolved. Arguments used in the call are compared to the parameter list of each overloaded function.</p></li><li><p><a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1443530" id="filepos1733590"><strong>function prototype</strong></a> Function declaration, consisting of the name, return type, and parameter types of a function. To call a function, its prototype must have been declared before the point of call.</p></li><li><p><strong>hidden names</strong> Names declared inside a scope hide previously declared entities with the same names declared outside that scope.</p></li><li><p><a id="filepos1734198"></a><a href="064-6.2._argument_passing.html#filepos1536683" id="filepos1734206"><strong>initializer_list</strong></a> Library class that represents a comma-separated list of objects of a single type enclosed inside curly braces.</p></li><li><p><a href="067-6.5._features_for_specialized_uses.html#filepos1648309" id="filepos1734495"><strong>inline function</strong></a> Request to the compiler to expand a function at the point of call, if possible. Inline functions avoid the normal function-calling overhead.</p></li><li><p><a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1449446" id="filepos1734813"><strong>link</strong></a> Compilation step in which multiple object files are put together to form an executable program.</p></li><li><p><a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1437640" id="filepos1735075"><strong>local static objects</strong></a> Local objects whose value persists across calls to the function. Local <code>static</code> objects that are created and initialized before control reaches their use and are destroyed when the program ends.</p></li><li><p><a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1432867" id="filepos1735513"><strong>local variables</strong></a> Variables defined inside a block.</p></li><li><p><a href="066-6.4._overloaded_functions.html#filepos1619786" id="filepos1735724"><strong>no match</strong></a> Compile-time error that results during function matching when there is no function with parameters that match the arguments in a given call.</p></li><li><p><a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1449278" id="filepos1736035"><strong>object code</strong></a> Format into which the compiler transforms our source code.</p></li><li><p><strong>object file</strong> File holding object code generated by the compiler from a given source file. An executable file is generated from one or more object files after the files are linked together.</p></li><li><p><strong>object lifetime</strong> Every object has an associated lifetime. Non<code>static</code> objects that are defined inside a block exist from when their definition is encountered until the end of the block in which they are defined. Global objects are created during program startup. Local <code>static</code> objects are created before the first time execution passes through the object’s definition. Global objects and local <code>static</code> objects are destroyed when the <code>main</code> function ends.</p></li><li><p><a href="066-6.4._overloaded_functions.html#filepos1617877" id="filepos1737409"><strong>overload resolution</strong></a> See function matching.</p></li><li><p><a href="066-6.4._overloaded_functions.html#filepos1597540" id="filepos1737613"><strong>overloaded function</strong></a> Function that has the same name as at least one other function. Overloaded functions must differ in the number or type of their parameters.</p></li><li><p><a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1415996" id="filepos1737934"><strong>parameters</strong></a> Local variables declared inside the function parameter list. Parameters are initialized by the arguments provided in each function call.</p></li><li><p><strong>pass by reference</strong> Description of how arguments are passed to parameters of reference type. Reference parameters work the same way as any other use of references; the parameter is bound to its corresponding argument.</p></li><li><p><strong>pass by value</strong> How arguments are passed to parameters of a nonreference type. A nonreference parameter is a copy of the value of its corresponding argument.</p></li><li><p><a href="067-6.5._features_for_specialized_uses.html#filepos1663185" id="filepos1738863"><strong>preprocessor macro</strong></a> Preprocessor facility that behaves like an inline function. Aside from <code>assert</code>, modern C++ programs make very little use of preprocessor macros.</p></li><li><p><a href="065-6.3._return_types_and_the_return_statement.html#filepos1580127" id="filepos1739250"><strong>recursion loop</strong></a> Description of a recursive function that omits a stopping condition and which calls itself until exhasuting the program stack.</p></li><li><p><a href="065-6.3._return_types_and_the_return_statement.html#filepos1578009" id="filepos1739553"><strong>recursive function</strong></a> Function that calls itself directly or indirectly.</p></li><li><p><a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1415882" id="filepos1739784"><strong>return type</strong></a> Part of a function declaration that specifies the type of the value that the function returns.</p></li><li><p><a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1446454" id="filepos1740052"><strong>separate compilation</strong></a> Ability to split a program into multiple separate source files.</p></li><li><p><a href="065-6.3._return_types_and_the_return_statement.html#filepos1591778" id="filepos1740298"><strong>trailing return type</strong></a> Return type specified after the parameter list.</p></li><li><p><a href="068-6.6._function_matching.html#filepos1678119" id="filepos1740528"><strong>viable functions</strong></a> Subset of the candidate functions that could match a given call. Viable functions have the same number of parameters as arguments to the call, and each argument type can be converted to the corresponding parameter type.</p></li><li><p><code>()</code>
<strong>operator</strong> Call operator. Executes a function. The name of a function or a function pointer precedes the parentheses, which enclose a (possibly empty) comma-separated list of arguments.</p></li>
 
</ul>
