<h3 id="filepos2028441">7.6. <code>static</code> Class Members</h3>
<p>Classes sometimes need members that are associated with the class, rather than with individual objects of the class type. For example, a bank account class might need a data member to represent the current prime interest rate. In this case, we’d want to associate the rate with the class, not with each individual object. From an efficiency standpoint, there’d be no reason for each object to store the rate. Much more importantly, if the rate changes, we’d want each object to use the new value.</p>
<h4>Declaring <code>static</code> Members</h4>
<p>We say a member is associated with the class by adding the keyword <code>static</code> to its declaration. Like any other member, <code>static</code> members can be <code>public</code> or <code>private</code>. The type of a <code>static</code> data member can be <code>const</code>, reference, array, class type, and so forth.</p>
<p><a id="filepos2030185"></a>As an example, we’ll define a class to represent an account record at a bank:</p>

```c++
class Account {
public:
    void calculate() { amount += amount * interestRate; }
    static double rate() { return interestRate; }
    static void rate(double);
private:
    std::string owner;
    double amount;
    static double interestRate;
    static double initRate();
};
```

<p>The <code>static</code> members of a class exist outside any object. Objects do not contain data associated with <code>static</code> data members. Thus, each <code>Account</code> object will contain two data members—<code>owner</code> and <code>amount</code>. There is only one <code>interestRate</code> object that will be shared by all the <code>Account</code> objects.</p>
<p>Similarly, <code>static</code> member functions are not bound to any object; they do not have a <code>this</code> pointer. As a result, <code>static</code> member functions may not be declared as <code>const</code>, and we may not refer to <code>this</code> in the body of a <code>static</code> member. This restriction applies both to explicit uses of <code>this</code> and to implicit uses of <code>this</code> by calling a non<code>static</code> member.</p>
<h4>Using a Class <code>static</code> Member</h4>
<p>We can access a <code>static</code> member directly through the scope operator:</p>

```c++
double r;
r = Account::rate(); // access a static member using the scope operator
```

<p>Even though <code>static</code> members are not part of the objects of its class, we can use an object, reference, or pointer of the class type to access a <code>static</code> member:</p>

```c++
Account ac1;
Account *ac2 = &ac1;
// equivalent ways to call the static member rate function
r = ac1.rate();      // through an Account object or reference
r = ac2->rate();     // through a pointer to an Account object
```

<p>Member functions can use <code>static</code> members directly, without the scope operator:</p>

```c++
class Account {
public:
    void calculate() { amount += amount * interestRate; }
private:
    static double interestRate;
    // remaining members as before
};
```

<h4><a id="filepos2036267"></a>Defining <code>static</code> Members</h4>
<p>As with any other member function, we can define a <code>static</code> member function inside or outside of the class body. When we define a <code>static</code> member outside the class, we do not repeat the <code>static</code> keyword. The keyword appears only with the declaration inside the class body:</p>

```c++
void Account::rate(double newRate)
{
    interestRate = newRate;
}
```

::: info
<p>As with any class member, when we refer to a class <code>static</code> member outside the class body, we must specify the class in which the member is defined. The <code>static</code> keyword, however, is used <em>only</em> on the declaration inside the class body.</p>
:::

<p>Because <code>static</code> data members are not part of individual objects of the class type, they are not defined when we create objects of the class. As a result, they are not initialized by the class’ constructors. Moreover, in general, we may not initialize a <code>static</code> member inside the class. Instead, we must define and initialize each <code>static</code> data member outside the class body. Like any other object, a <code>static</code> data member may be defined only once.</p>
<p>Like global objects (§ <a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1431793">6.1.1</a>, p. <a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1431793">204</a>), <code>static</code> data members are defined outside any function. Hence, once they are defined, they continue to exist until the program completes.</p>
<p>We define a <code>static</code> data member similarly to how we define class member functions outside the class. We name the object’s type, followed by the name of the class, the scope operator, and the member’s own name:</p>

```c++
// define and initialize a static class member
double Account::interestRate = initRate();
```

<p>This statement defines the object named <code>interestRate</code> that is a <code>static</code> member of class <code>Account</code> and has type <code>double</code>. Once the class name is seen, the remainder of the definition is in the scope of the class. As a result, we can use <code>initRate</code> without qualification as the initializer for <code>rate</code>. Note also that even though <code>initRate</code> is <code>private</code>, we can use this function to initialize <code>interestRate</code>. The definition of <code>interestRate</code>, like any other member definition, has access to the <code>private</code> members of the class.</p>

::: tip
<p>Tip</p>
<p>The best way to ensure that the object is defined exactly once is to put the definition of <code>static</code> data members in the same file that contains the definitions of the class noninline member functions.</p>
:::

<h4>In-Class Initialization of <code>static</code> Data Members</h4>
<p>Ordinarily, class <code>static</code> members may not be initialized in the class body. However, we can provide in-class initializers for <code>static</code> members that have <code>const</code> integral type and must do so for <code>static</code> members that are <code>constexpr</code>s of literal <a id="filepos2042788"></a>type (§ <a href="077-7.5._constructors_revisited.html#filepos2019288">7.5.6</a>, p. <a href="077-7.5._constructors_revisited.html#filepos2019288">299</a>). The initializers must be constant expressions. Such members are themselves constant expressions; they can be used where a constant expression is required. For example, we can use an initialized <code>static</code> data member to specify the dimension of an array member:</p>

```c++
class Account {
public:
    static double rate() { return interestRate; }
    static void rate(double);
private:
    static constexpr int period = 30;// period is a constant expression
    double daily_tbl[period];
};
```

<p>If the member is used only in contexts where the compiler can substitute the member’s value, then an initialized <code>const</code> or <code>constexpr static</code> need not be separately defined. However, if we use the member in a context in which the value cannot be substituted, then there must be a definition for that member.</p>
<p>For example, if the only use we make of <code>period</code> is to define the dimension of <code>daily_tbl</code>, there is no need to define <code>period</code> outside of <code>Account</code>. However, if we omit the definition, it is possible that even seemingly trivial changes to the program might cause the program to fail to compile because of the missing definition. For example, if we pass <code>Account::period</code> to a function that takes a <code>const int&amp;</code>, then <code>period</code> must be defined.</p>
<p>If an initializer is provided inside the class, the member’s definition must not specify an initial value:</p>

```c++
// definition of a static member with no initializer
constexpr int Account::period; // initializer provided in the class definition
```

::: tip
<p>Best Practices</p>
<p>Even if a <code>const static</code> data member is initialized in the class body, that member ordinarily should be defined outside the class definition.</p>
:::

<h4><code>static</code> Members Can Be Used in Ways Ordinary Members Can’t</h4>
<p>As we’ve seen, <code>static</code> members exist independently of any other object. As a result, they can be used in ways that would be illegal for non<code>static</code> data members. As one example, a <code>static</code> data member can have incomplete type (§ <a href="075-7.3._additional_class_features.html#filepos1897012">7.3.3</a>, p. <a href="075-7.3._additional_class_features.html#filepos1897012">278</a>). In particular, a <code>static</code> data member can have the same type as the class type of which it is a member. A non<code>static</code> data member is restricted to being declared as a pointer or a reference to an object of its class:</p>

```c++
class Bar {
public:
    // ...
private:
    static Bar mem1; // ok: static member can have incomplete type
    Bar *mem2;       // ok: pointer member can have incomplete type
    Bar mem3;        // error: data members must have complete type
};
```

<p><a id="filepos2049039"></a>Another difference between <code>static</code> and ordinary members is that we can use a <code>static</code> member as a default argument (§ <a href="067-6.5._features_for_specialized_uses.html#filepos1631032">6.5.1</a>, p. <a href="067-6.5._features_for_specialized_uses.html#filepos1631032">236</a>):</p>

```c++
class Screen {
public:
    // bkground refers to the static member
    // declared later in the class definition
    Screen& clear(char = bkground);
private:
    static const char bkground;
};
```

<p>A non<code>static</code> data member may not be used as a default argument because its value is part of the object of which it is a member. Using a non<code>static</code> data member as a default argument provides no object from which to obtain the member’s value and so is an error.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 7.6</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 7.56:</strong> What is a <code>static</code> class member? What are the advantages of <code>static</code> members? How do they differ from ordinary members?</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 7.57:</strong> Write your own version of the <code>Account</code> class.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 7.58:</strong> Which, if any, of the following <code>static</code> data member declarations and definitions are errors? Explain why.</p>

```c++
// example.h
class Example {
public:
    static double rate = 6.5;
    static const int vecSize = 20;
    static vector<double> vec(vecSize);
};
// example.C
#include "example.h"
double Example::rate;
vector<double> Example::vec;
```

:::
