---
title: 14.8. Function-Call Operator
---

<h3 id="filepos3657799"><a id="filepos3657832"></a>14.8. Function-Call Operator</h3>
<Badge type="info" text="Fundamental" />
<p>Classes that overload the call operator allow objects of its type to be used as if they were a function. Because such classes can also store state, they can be more flexible than ordinary functions.</p>
<p>As a simple example, the following <code>struct</code>, named <code>absInt</code>, has a call operator that returns the absolute value of its argument:</p>

```c++
struct absInt {
    int operator()(int val) const {
        return val < 0 ? -val : val;
    }
};
```

<p>This class defines a single operation: the function-call operator. That operator takes an argument of type <code>int</code> and returns the argument’s absolute value.</p>
<p>We use the call operator by applying an argument list to an <code>absInt</code> object in a way that looks like a function call:</p>

```c++
int i = -42;
absInt absObj;      // object that has a function-call operator
int ui = absObj(i); // passes i to absObj.operator()
```

<p>Even though <code>absObj</code> is an object, not a function, we can “call” this object. Calling an object runs its overloaded call operator. In this case, that operator takes an <code>int</code> value and returns its absolute value.</p>

::: info
<p>The function-call operator must be a member function. A class may define multiple versions of the call operator, each of which must differ as to the number or types of their parameters.</p>
:::

<p>Objects of classes that define the call operator are referred to as <strong><a href="140-defined_terms.html#filepos3777376" id="filepos3661371">function objects</a></strong>. Such objects “act like functions” because we can call them.</p>
<h4>Function-Object Classes with State</h4>
<p>Like any other class, a function-object class can have additional members aside from <code>operator()</code>. Function-object classes often contain data members that are used to customize the operations in the call operator.</p>
<p>As an example, we’ll define a class that prints a <code>string</code> argument. By default, our class will write to <code>cout</code> and will print a space following each <code>string</code>. We’ll also let users of our class provide a different stream on which to write and provide a different separator. We can define this class as follows:</p>

```c++
class PrintString {
public:
    PrintString(ostream &o = cout, char c = ' '):
        os(o), sep(c) { }
    void operator()(const string &s) const { os << s << sep; }
private:
    ostream &os;   // stream on which to write
    char sep;      // character to print after each output
};
```

<p><a id="filepos3663503"></a>Our class has a constructor that takes a reference to an output stream and a character to use as the separator. It uses <code>cout</code> and a space as default arguments (§ <a href="067-6.5._features_for_specialized_uses.html#filepos1631032">6.5.1</a>, p. <a href="067-6.5._features_for_specialized_uses.html#filepos1631032">236</a>) for these parameters. The body of the function-call operator uses these members when it prints the given <code>string</code>.</p>
<p>When we define <code>PrintString</code> objects, we can use the defaults or supply our own values for the separator or output stream:</p>

```c++
PrintString printer;   // uses the defaults; prints to cout
printer(s);            // prints s followed by a space on cout
PrintString errors(cerr, '\n');
errors(s);             // prints s followed by a newline on cerr
```

<p>Function objects are most often used as arguments to the generic algorithms. For example, we can use the library <code>for_each</code> algorithm (§ <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">10.3.2</a>, p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">391</a>) and our <code>PrintString</code> class to print the contents of a container:</p>

```c++
for_each(vs.begin(), vs.end(), PrintString(cerr, '\n'));
```

<p>The third argument to <code>for_each</code> is a temporary object of type <code>PrintString</code> that we initialize from <code>cerr</code> and a newline character. The call to <code>for_each</code> will print each element in <code>vs</code> to <code>cerr</code> followed by a newline.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 14.8</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 14.33:</strong> How many operands may an overloaded function-call operator take?</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 14.34:</strong> Define a function-object class to perform an if-then-else operation: The call operator for this class should take three parameters. It should test its first parameter and if that test succeeds, it should return its second parameter; otherwise, it should return its third parameter.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 14.35:</strong> Write a class like <code>PrintString</code> that reads a line of input from an <code>istream</code> and returns a <code>string</code> representing what was read. If the read fails, return the empty <code>string</code>.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 14.36:</strong> Use the class from the previous exercise to read the standard input, storing each line as an element in a <code>vector</code>.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 14.37:</strong> Write a class that tests whether two values are equal. Use that object and the library algorithms to write a program to replace all instances of a given value in a sequence.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos3668993">14.8.1. Lambdas Are Function Objects</h4>
<p>In the previous section, we used a <code>PrintString</code> object as an argument in a call to <code>for_each</code>. This usage is similar to the programs we wrote in § <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">10.3.2</a> (p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">388</a>) that used lambda expressions. When we write a lambda, the compiler translates that expression into an unnamed object of an unnamed class (§ <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2560162">10.3.3</a>, p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2560162">392</a>). The <a id="filepos3669700"></a>classes generated from a lambda contain an overloaded function-call operator. For example, the lambda that we passed as the last argument to <code>stable_sort</code>:</p>

```c++
// sort words by size, but maintain alphabetical order for words of the same size
stable_sort(words.begin(), words.end(),
            [](const string &a, const string &b)
              { return a.size() < b.size();});
```

<p>acts like an unnamed object of a class that would look something like</p>

```c++
class ShorterString {
public:
    bool operator()(const string &s1, const string &s2) const
    { return s1.size() < s2.size(); }
};
```

<p>The generated class has a single member, which is a function-call operator that takes two <code>string</code>s and compares their lengths. The parameter list and function body are the same as the lambda. As we saw in § <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2560162">10.3.3</a> (p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2560162">395</a>), by default, lambdas may not change their captured variables. As a result, by default, the function-call operator in a class generated from a lambda is a <code>const</code> member function. If the lambda is declared as <code>mutable</code>, then the call operator is not <code>const</code>.</p>
<p>We can rewrite the call to <code>stable_sort</code> to use this class instead of the lambda expression:</p>

```c++
stable_sort(words.begin(), words.end(), ShorterString());
```

<p>The third argument is a newly constructed <code>ShorterString</code> object. The code in <code>stable_sort</code> will “call” this object each time it compares two <code>string</code>s. When the object is called, it will execute the body of its call operator, returning <code>true</code> if the first <code>string</code>’s size is less than the second’s.</p>
<h5>Classes Representing Lambdas with Captures</h5>
<p>As we’ve seen, when a lambda captures a variable by reference, it is up to the program to ensure that the variable to which the reference refers exists when the lambda is executed (§ <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2560162">10.3.3</a>, p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2560162">393</a>). Therefore, the compiler is permitted to use the reference directly without storing that reference as a data member in the generated class.</p>
<p>In contrast, variables that are captured by value are copied into the lambda (§ <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2560162">10.3.3</a>, p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2560162">392</a>). As a result, classes generated from lambdas that capture variables by value have data members corresponding to each such variable. These classes also have a constructor to initialize these data members from the value of the captured variables. As an example, in § <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">10.3.2</a> (p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">390</a>), the lambda that we used to find the first <code>string</code> whose length was greater than or equal to a given bound:</p>

```c++
// get an iterator to the first element whose size() is >= sz
auto wc = find_if(words.begin(), words.end(),
            [sz](const string &a)
```

<p>would generate a class that looks something like</p>
<p><a id="filepos3675757"></a></p>

```c++
class SizeComp {
    SizeComp(size_t n): sz(n) { } // parameter for each captured variable
    // call operator with the same return type, parameters, and body as the lambda
    bool operator()(const string &s) const
        { return s.size() >= sz; }
private:
    size_t sz; // a data member for each variable captured by value
};
```

<p>Unlike our <code>ShorterString</code> class, this class has a data member and a constructor to initialize that member. This synthesized class does not have a default constructor; to use this class, we must pass an argument:</p>

```c++
// get an iterator to the first element whose size() is >= sz
auto wc = find_if(words.begin(), words.end(), SizeComp(sz));
```

<p>Classes generated from a lambda expression have a deleted default constructor, deleted assignment operators, and a default destructor. Whether the class has a defaulted or deleted copy/move constructor depends in the usual ways on the types of the captured data members (§ <a href="121-13.1._copy_assign_and_destroy.html#filepos3263004">13.1.6</a>, p. <a href="121-13.1._copy_assign_and_destroy.html#filepos3263004">508</a>, and § <a href="126-13.6._moving_objects.html#filepos3443291">13.6.2</a>, p. <a href="126-13.6._moving_objects.html#filepos3443291">537</a>).</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 14.8.1</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 14.38:</strong> Write a class that tests whether the length of a given <code>string</code> matches a given bound. Use that object to write a program to report how many words in an input file are of sizes 1 through 10 inclusive.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 14.39:</strong> Revise the previous program to report the count of words that are sizes 1 through 9 and 10 or more.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 14.40:</strong> Rewrite the <code>biggies</code> function from § <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">10.3.2</a> (p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">391</a>) to use function-object classes in place of lambdas.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 14.41:</strong> Why do you suppose the new standard added lambdas? Explain when you would use a lambda and when you would write a class instead.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos3679636">14.8.2. Library-Defined Function Objects</h4>
<p>The standard library defines a set of classes that represent the arithmetic, relational, and logical operators. Each class defines a call operator that applies the named operation. For example, the <code>plus</code> class has a function-call operator that applies <code>+</code> to a pair of operands; the <code>modulus</code> class defines a call operator that applies the binary <code>%</code> operator; the <code>equal_to</code> class applies <code>==;</code> and so on.</p>
<p>These classes are templates to which we supply a single type. That type specifies the parameter type for the call operator. For example, <code>plus&lt;string&gt;</code> applies the <code>string</code> addition operator to <code>string</code> objects; for <code>plus&lt;int&gt;</code> the operands are <code>int</code>s; <code>plus&lt;Sales_data&gt;</code> applies <code>+</code> to <code>Sales_data</code>s; and so on:</p>
<p><a id="filepos3681503"></a></p>

```c++
plus<int> intAdd;       // function object that can add two int values
negate<int> intNegate;  // function object that can negate an int value
// uses intAdd::operator(int, int) to add 10 and 20
int sum = intAdd(10, 20);         // equivalent to sum = 30
sum = intNegate(intAdd(10, 20));  // equivalent to sum = 30
// uses intNegate::operator(int) to generate -10 as the second parameter
// to intAdd::operator(int, int)
sum = intAdd(10, intNegate(10));  // sum = 0
```

<p>These types, listed in <a href="137-14.8._functioncall_operator.html#filepos3684209">Table 14.2</a>, are defined in the <code>functional</code> header.</p>
<p><a id="filepos3684209"></a>Table 14.2. Library Function Objects</p>

| Arithmetic         | Relational            | Logical             |
|--------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|
| `plus<Type>`       | `equal_to<Type>`      | `logical_and<Type>` |  
| `minus<Type>`      | `not_equal_to<Type>`  | `logical_or<Type>`  |  
| `multiplies<Type>` | `greater<Type>`       | `logical_not<Type>` |  
| `divides<Type>`    | `greater_equal<Type>` |                     |
| `modulus<Type>`    | `less<Type>`          |                     |   
| `negate<Type>`     | `less_equal<Type>`    |                     |

<h5>Using a Library Function Object with the Algorithms</h5>
<p>The function-object classes that represent operators are often used to override the default operator used by an algorithm. As we’ve seen, by default, the sorting algorithms use <code>operator&lt;</code>, which ordinarily sorts the sequence into ascending order. To sort into descending order, we can pass an object of type <code>greater</code>. That class generates a call operator that invokes the greater-than operator of the underlying element type. For example, if <code>svec</code> is a <code>vector&lt;string&gt;</code>,</p>

```c++
// passes a temporary function object that applies the < operator to two strings
sort(svec.begin(), svec.end(), greater<string>());
```

<p>sorts the <code>vector</code> in descending order. The third argument is an unnamed object of type <code>greater&lt;string&gt;</code>. When <code>sort</code> compares elements, rather than applying the <code>&lt;</code> operator for the element type, it will call the given <code>greater</code> function object. That object applies <code>&gt;</code> to the <code>string</code> elements.</p>
<p>One important aspect of these library function objects is that the library guarantees that they will work for pointers. Recall that comparing two unrelated pointers is undefined (§ <a href="034-3.5._arrays.html#filepos881970">3.5.3</a>, p. <a href="034-3.5._arrays.html#filepos881970">120</a>). However, we might want to <code>sort</code> a <code>vector</code> of pointers based on their addresses in memory. Although it would be undefined for us to do so directly, we can do so through one of the library function objects:</p>

```c++
vector<string *> nameTable;  // vector of pointers
// error: the pointers in nameTable are unrelated, so < is undefined
sort(nameTable.begin(), nameTable.end(),
     [](string *a, string *b) { return a < b; });
// ok: library guarantees that less on pointer types is well defined
sort(nameTable.begin(), nameTable.end(), less<string*>());
```

<p><a id="filepos3688875"></a>It is also worth noting that the associative containers use <code>less&lt;key_type&gt;</code> to order their elements. As a result, we can define a <code>set</code> of pointers or use a pointer as the key in a <code>map</code> without specifying <code>less</code> directly.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 14.8.2</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 14.42:</strong> Using library function objects and adaptors, define an expression to</p>
<p>(a) Count the number of values that are greater than 1024</p>
<p>(b) Find the first string that is not equal to <code>pooh</code></p>
<p>(c) Multiply all values by 2</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 14.43:</strong> Using library function objects, determine whether a given <code>int</code> value is divisible by any element in a container of <code>int</code>s.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos3690557">14.8.3. Callable Objects and <code>function</code></h4>
<p>C++ has several kinds of callable objects: functions and pointers to functions, lambdas (§ <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">10.3.2</a>, p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">388</a>), objects created by <code>bind</code> (§ <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2586884">10.3.4</a>, p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2586884">397</a>), and classes that overload the function-call operator.</p>
<p>Like any other object, a callable object has a type. For example, each lambda has its own unique (unnamed) class type. Function and function-pointer types vary by their return type and argument types, and so on.</p>
<p>However, two callable objects with different types may share the same <strong><a href="140-defined_terms.html#filepos3775218" id="filepos3691634">call signature</a></strong>. The call signature specifies the type returned by a call to the object and the argument type(s) that must be passed in the call. A call signature corresponds to a function type. For example:</p>

```c++
int(int, int)
```

<p>is a function type that takes two <code>int</code>s and returns an <code>int</code>.</p>
<h5>Different Types Can Have the Same Call Signature</h5>
<p>Sometimes we want to treat several callable objects that share a call signature as if they had the same type. For example, consider the following different types of callable objects:</p>

```c++
// ordinary function
int add(int i, int j) { return i + j; }
// lambda, which generates an unnamed function-object class
auto mod = [](int i, int j) { return i % j; };
// function-object class
struct div {
    int operator()(int denominator, int divisor) {
        return denominator / divisor;
    }
};
```

<p><a id="filepos3693609"></a>Each of these callables applies an arithmetic operation to its parameters. Even though each has a distinct type, they all share the same call signature:</p>

```c++
int(int, int)
```

<p>We might want to use these callables to build a simple desk calculator. To do so, we’d want to define a <strong><a href="140-defined_terms.html#filepos3777681" id="filepos3694101">function table</a></strong> to store “pointers” to these callables. When the program needs to execute a particular operation, it will look in the table to find which function to call.</p>
<p>In C++, function tables are easy to implement using a <code>map</code>. In this case, we’ll use a <code>string</code> corresponding to an operator symbol as the key; the value will be the function that implements that operator. When we want to evaluate a given operator, we’ll index the <code>map</code> with that operator and call the resulting element.</p>
<p>If all our functions were freestanding functions, and assuming we were handling only binary operators for type <code>int</code>, we could define the <code>map</code> as</p>

```c++
// maps an operator to a pointer to a function taking two ints and returning an int
map<string, int(*)(int,int)> binops;
```

<p>We could put a pointer to <code>add</code> into <code>binops</code> as follows:</p>

```c++
// ok: add is a pointer to function of the appropriate type
binops.insert({"+", add}); // {"+", add} is a pair § 11.2.3 (p. 426)
```

<p>However, we can’t store <code>mod</code> or <code>div</code> in <code>binops</code>:</p>

```c++
binops.insert({"%", mod}); // error: mod is not a pointer to function
```

<p>The problem is that <code>mod</code> is a lambda, and each lambda has its own class type. That type does not match the type of the values stored in <code>binops</code>.</p>
<h5>The Library <code>function</code> Type</h5>
<p>We can solve this problem using a new library type named <code>function</code> that is defined in the <code>functional</code> header; <a href="137-14.8._functioncall_operator.html#filepos3699074">Table 14.3</a> (p. <a href="137-14.8._functioncall_operator.html#filepos3699074">579</a>) lists the operations defined by <code>function</code>.</p>
<p><a id="filepos3699074"></a>Table 14.3. Operations on <code>function</code></p>

| Code                      | Description                                                                                                                                                           |
|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `function<T> f;`          | `f` is a null `function` object that can store callable objects with a call signature that is equivalent to the function type `T` (i.e., `T` is `result_type(args)`). |
| `function<T> f(nullptr);` | Explicitly construct a null `function`.                                                                                                                               |
| `function<T> f(obj);`     | Stores a copy of the callable object `obj` in `f`.                                                                                                                    |
| `f`                       | Use `f` as a condition; `true` if `f` holds a callable object; `false` otherwise.                                                                                     |
| `f(args)`                 | Calls the object in `f` passing `args`.                                                                                                                               |

**Types defined as members of `function<T>`:**

| Type                                                         | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `result_type`                                                | The type returned by this `function` type's callable object.                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| `argument_type` `first_argument_type` `second_argument_type` | Types defined when `T` has exactly one or two arguments. If `T` has one argument, `argument_type` is a synonym for that type. If it has two arguments, `first_argument_type` and `second_argument_type` are synonyms for those argument types. |

<a id="filepos3699379"></a><Badge type="tip" text="C++11" />
<p><code>function</code> is a template. As with other templates we’ve used, we must specify additional information when we create a <code>function</code> type. In this case, that information is the call signature of the objects that this particular <code>function</code> type can represent. As with other templates, we specify the type inside angle brackets:</p>

```c++
function<int(int, int)>
```

<p>Here we’ve declared a <code>function</code> type that can represent callable objects that return an <code>int</code> result and have two <code>int</code> parameters. We can use that type to represent any of our desk calculator types:</p>

```c++
function<int(int, int)> f1 = add;    // function pointer
function<int(int, int)> f2 = div();  // object of a function-object class
function<int(int, int)> f3 = [](int  i, int j) // lambda
                             { return i * j; };
cout << f1(4,2) << endl; // prints 6
cout << f2(4,2) << endl; // prints 2
cout << f3(4,2) << endl; // prints 8
```

<p>We can now redefine our <code>map</code> using this <code>function</code> type:</p>

```c++
// table of callable objects corresponding to each binary operator
// all the callables must take two ints and return an int
// an element can be a function pointer, function object, or lambda
map<string, function<int(int, int)>> binops;
```

<p>We can add each of our callable objects, be they function pointers, lambdas, or function objects, to this <code>map</code>:</p>

```c++
map<string, function<int(int, int)>> binops = {
    {"+", add},                  // function pointer
    {"-", std::minus<int>()},    // library function object
    {"/",  div()},               // user-defined function object
    {"*", [](int i, int j) { return i * j; }}, // unnamed lambda
    {"%", mod} };                // named lambda object
```

<p>Our <code>map</code> has five elements. Although the underlying callable objects all have different types from one another, we can store each of these distinct types in the common <code>function&lt;int(int, int)&gt;</code> type.</p>
<p>As usual, when we index a <code>map</code>, we get a reference to the associated value. When we index <code>binops</code>, we get a reference to an object of type <code>function</code>. The <code>function</code> type overloads the call operator. That call operator takes its own arguments and passes them along to its stored callable object:</p>

```c++
binops["+"](10, 5); // calls add(10, 5)
binops["-"](10, 5); // uses the call operator of the minus<int> object
binops["/"](10, 5); // uses the call operator of the div object
binops["*"](10, 5); // calls the lambda function object
binops["%"](10, 5); // calls the lambda function object
```

<p>Here we call each of the operations stored in <code>binops</code>. In the first call, the element we get back holds a function pointer that points to our <code>add</code> function. Calling <code>binops["+"](10, 5)</code> uses that pointer to call <code>add</code>, passing it the values <code>10</code> and <code>5</code>. In the next call, <code>binops["-"]</code>, returns a <code>function</code> that stores an object of type <code>std::minus&lt;int&gt;</code>. We call that object’s call operator, and so on.</p>
<h5>Overloaded Functions and <code>function</code></h5>
<p>We cannot (directly) store the name of an overloaded function in an object of type <code>function</code>:</p>

```c++
int add(int i, int j) { return i + j; }
Sales_data add(const Sales_data&, const Sales_data&);
map<string, function<int(int, int)>> binops;
binops.insert( {"+", add} ); // error: which add?
```

<p>One way to resolve the ambiguity is to store a function pointer (§ <a href="069-6.7._pointers_to_functions.html#filepos1702852">6.7</a>, p. <a href="069-6.7._pointers_to_functions.html#filepos1702852">247</a>) instead of the name of the function:</p>

```c++
int (*fp)(int,int) = add; // pointer to the version of add that takes two ints
binops.insert( {"+", fp} ); // ok: fp points to the right version of add
```

<p><a id="filepos3710616"></a>Alternatively, we can use a lambda to disambiguate:</p>

```c++
// ok: use a lambda to disambiguate which version of add we want to use
binops.insert( {"+", [](int a, int b) {return add(a, b);} } );
```

<p>The call inside the lambda body passes two <code>int</code>s. That call can match only the version of <code>add</code> that takes two <code>int</code>s, and so that is the function that is called when the lambda is executed.</p>

::: info
<p>The <code>function</code> class in the new library is not related to classes named <code>unary_function</code> and <code>binary_function</code> that were part of earlier versions of the library. These classes have been deprecated by the more general <code>bind</code> function (§ <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2586884">10.3.4</a>, p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2586884">401</a>).</p>
:::

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 14.8.3</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 14.44:</strong> Write your own version of a simple desk calculator that can handle binary operations.</p>
:::
