---
title: 15.4. Abstract Base Classes
---

<h3 id="filepos3884701">15.4. Abstract Base Classes</h3>
<p>Imagine that we want to extend our bookstore classes to support several discount strategies. In addition to a bulk discount, we might offer a discount for purchases up to a certain quantity and then charge the full price thereafter. Or we might offer a discount for purchases above a certain limit but not for purchases up to that limit.</p>
<p>Each of these discount strategies is the same in that it requires a quantity and a discount amount. We might support these differing strategies by defining a new class named <code>Disc_quote</code> to store the quantity and the discount amount. Classes, such as <code>Bulk_item</code>, that represent a specific discount strategy will inherit from <a id="filepos3885681"></a><code>Disc_quote</code>. Each of the derived classes will implement its discount strategy by defining its own version of <code>net_price</code>.</p>
<p>Before we can define our <code>Disc_Quote</code> class, we have to decide what to do about <code>net_price</code>. Our <code>Disc_quote</code> class doesn’t correspond to any particular discount strategy; there is no meaning to ascribe to <code>net_price</code> for this class.</p>
<p>We could define <code>Disc_quote</code> without its own version of <code>net_price</code>. In this case, <code>Disc_quote</code> would inherit <code>net_price</code> from <code>Quote</code>.</p>
<p>However, this design would make it possible for our users to write nonsensical code. A user could create an object of type <code>Disc_quote</code> by supplying a quantity and a discount rate. Passing that <code>Disc_quote</code> object to a function such as <code>print_total</code> would use the <code>Quote</code> version of <code>net_price</code>. The calculated price would not include the discount that was supplied when the object was created. That state of affairs makes no sense.</p>
<h4>Pure Virtual Functions</h4>
<p>Thinking about the question in this detail reveals that our problem is not just that we don’t know how to define <code>net_price</code>. In practice, we’d like to prevent users from creating <code>Disc_quote</code> objects at all. This class represents the general concept of a discounted book, not a concrete discount strategy.</p>
<p>We can enforce this design intent—and make it clear that there is no meaning for <code>net_price</code>—by defining <code>net_price</code> as a <strong><a href="152-defined_terms.html#filepos4147890" id="filepos3888708">pure virtual</a></strong> function. Unlike ordinary virtuals, a pure virtual function does not have to be defined. We specify that a virtual function is a pure virtual by writing <code>= 0</code> in place of a function body (i.e., just before the semicolon that ends the declaration). The <code>= 0</code> may appear only on the declaration of a virtual function in the class body:</p>

```c++
// class to hold the discount rate and quantity
// derived classes will implement pricing strategies using these data
class Disc_quote : public Quote {
public:
    Disc_quote() = default;
    Disc_quote(const std::string& book, double price,
              std::size_t qty, double disc):
                 Quote(book, price),
                 quantity(qty), discount(disc) { }
    double net_price(std::size_t) const = 0;
protected:
    std::size_t quantity = 0; //  purchase size for the discount to apply
    double discount = 0.0;    //  fractional discount to apply
};
```

<p>Like our earlier <code>Bulk_item</code> class, <code>Disc_quote</code> defines a default constructor and a constructor that takes four parameters. Although we cannot define objects of this type directly, constructors in classes derived from <code>Disc_quote</code> will use the <code>Disc_quote</code> constructors to construct the <code>Disc_quote</code> part of their objects. The constructor that has four parameters passes its first two to the <code>Quote</code> constructor and directly initializes its own members, <code>discount</code> and <code>quantity</code>. The default constructor default initializes those members.</p>
<p><a id="filepos3891932"></a>It is worth noting that we can provide a definition for a pure virtual. However, the function body must be defined outside the class. That is, we cannot provide a function body inside the class for a function that is <code>= 0</code>.</p>
<h4>Classes with Pure Virtuals Are Abstract Base Classes</h4>
<p>A class containing (or inheriting without overridding) a pure virtual function is an <strong><a href="152-defined_terms.html#filepos4140092" id="filepos3892498">abstract base class</a></strong>. An abstract base class defines an interface for subsequent classes to override. We cannot (directly) create objects of a type that is an abstract base class. Because <code>Disc_quote</code> defines <code>net_price</code> as a pure virtual, we cannot define objects of type <code>Disc_quote</code>. We can define objects of classes that inherit from <code>Disc_quote</code>, so long as those classes override <code>net_price</code>:</p>

```c++
// Disc_quote declares pure virtual functions, which Bulk_quote will override
Disc_quote discounted; // error: can't define a Disc_quote object
Bulk_quote bulk;       // ok: Bulk_quote has no pure virtual functions
```

<p>Classes that inherit from <code>Disc_quote</code> must define <code>net_price</code> or those classes will be abstract as well.</p>

::: info
<p>We may not create objects of a type that is an abstract base class.</p>
:::

<h4>A Derived Class Constructor Initializes Its Direct Base Class Only</h4>
<p>Now we can reimplement <code>Bulk_quote</code> to inherit from <code>Disc_quote</code> rather than inheriting directly from <code>Quote</code>:</p>

```c++
// the discount kicks in when a specified number of copies of the same book are sold
// the discount is expressed as a fraction to use to reduce the normal price
class Bulk_quote : public Disc_quote {
public:
    Bulk_quote() = default;
    Bulk_quote(const std::string& book, double price,
              std::size_t qty, double disc):
          Disc_quote(book, price, qty, disc) { }
    // overrides the base version to implement the bulk purchase discount policy
    double net_price(std::size_t) const override;
};
```

<p>This version of <code>Bulk_quote</code> has a direct base class, <code>Disc_quote</code>, and an indirect base class, <code>Quote</code>. Each <code>Bulk_quote</code> object has three subobjects: an (empty) <code>Bulk_quote</code> part, a <code>Disc_quote</code> subobject, and a <code>Quote</code> subobject.</p>
<p>As we’ve seen, each class controls the initialization of objects of its type. Therefore, even though <code>Bulk_quote</code> has no data members of its own, it provides the same four-argument constructor as in our original class. Our new constructor passes its arguments to the <code>Disc_quote</code> constructor. That constructor in turn runs the <code>Quote</code> constructor. The <code>Quote</code> constructor initializes the <code>bookNo</code> and <code>price</code> members of <code>bulk</code>. When the <code>Quote</code> constructor ends, the <code>Disc_quote</code> constructor runs and initializes the <code>quantity</code> and <code>discount</code> members. At this <a id="filepos3898889"></a>point, the <code>Bulk_quote</code> constructor resumes. That constructor has no further initializations or any other work to do.</p>

::: info
<p>Key Concept: Refactoring</p>
<p>Adding <code>Disc_quote</code> to the <code>Quote</code> hierarchy is an example of <em><a href="152-defined_terms.html#filepos4148442" id="filepos3899552">refactoring.</a></em> Refactoring involves redesigning a class hierarchy to move operations and/or data from one class to another. Refactoring is common in object-oriented applications.</p>
<p>It is noteworthy that even though we changed the inheritance hierarchy, code that uses <code>Bulk_quote</code> or <code>Quote</code> would not need to change. However, when classes are refactored (or changed in any other way) we must recompile any code that uses those classes.</p>
:::

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 15.4</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 15.15:</strong> Define your own versions of <code>Disc_quote</code> and <code>Bulk_quote</code>.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 15.16:</strong> Rewrite the class representing a limited discount strategy, which you wrote for the exercises in § <a href="143-15.2._defining_base_and_derived_classes.html#filepos3806030">15.2.2</a> (p. <a href="143-15.2._defining_base_and_derived_classes.html#filepos3806030">601</a>), to inherit from <code>Disc_quote</code>.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 15.17:</strong> Try to define an object of type <code>Disc_quote</code> and see what errors you get from the compiler.</p>
:::
