---
title: 15.6. Class Scope under Inheritance
---

<h3 id="filepos3941072"><a id="filepos3941105"></a>15.6. Class Scope under Inheritance</h3>
<Badge type="info" text="Fundamental" />
<p>Each class defines its own scope (§<a href="076-7.4._class_scope.html#filepos1923787">7.4</a>, p. <a href="076-7.4._class_scope.html#filepos1923787">282</a>) within which its members are defined. Under inheritance, the scope of a derived class is nested (§<a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos382972">2.2.4</a>, p. <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos382972">48</a>) inside the scope of its base classes. If a name is unresolved within the scope of the derived class, the enclosing base-class scopes are searched for a definition of that name.</p>
<p>The fact that the scope of a derived class nests inside the scope of its base classes can be surprising. After all, the base and derived classes are defined in separate parts of our program’s text. However, it is this hierarchical nesting of class scopes that allows the members of a derived class to use members of its base class as if those members were part of the derived class. For example, when we write</p>

```c++
Bulk_quote bulk;
cout << bulk.isbn();
```

<p>the use of the name <code>isbn</code> is resolved as follows:</p>
<ul><li>Because we called <code>isbn</code> on an object of type <code>Bulk_quote</code>, the search starts in the <code>Bulk_quote</code> class. The name <code>isbn</code> is not found in that class.</li><li>Because <code>Bulk_quote</code> is derived from <code>Disc_quote</code>, the <code>Disc_quote</code> class is searched next. The name is still not found.</li><li>Because <code>Disc_quote</code> is derived from <code>Quote</code>, the <code>Quote</code> class is searched next. The name <code>isbn</code> is found in that class; the use of <code>isbn</code> is resolved to the <code>isbn</code> in <code>Quote</code>.</li></ul>

<h4>Name Lookup Happens at Compile Time</h4>
<p>The static type (§<a href="143-15.2._defining_base_and_derived_classes.html#filepos3837843">15.2.3</a>, p. <a href="143-15.2._defining_base_and_derived_classes.html#filepos3837843">601</a>) of an object, reference, or pointer determines which members of that object are visible. Even when the static and dynamic types might differ (as can happen when a reference or pointer to a base class is used), the static type determines what members can be used. As an example, we might add a member to the <code>Disc_quote</code> class that returns a <code>pair</code> (§<a href="108-11.2._overview_of_the_associative_containers.html#filepos2764131">11.2.3</a>, p. <a href="108-11.2._overview_of_the_associative_containers.html#filepos2764131">426</a>) holding the minimum (or maximum) quantity and the discounted price:</p>

```c++
class Disc_quote : public Quote {
public:
    std::pair<size_t, double> discount_policy() const
        { return {quantity, discount}; }
    // other members as before
};
```

<p>We can use <code>discount_policy</code> only through an object, pointer, or reference of type <code>Disc_quote</code> or of a class derived from <code>Disc_quote</code>:</p>

```c++
Bulk_quote bulk;
Bulk_quote *bulkP = &bulk; //  static and dynamic types are the same
Quote *itemP = &bulk;      //  static and dynamic types differ
bulkP->discount_policy();  //  ok: bulkP has type Bulk_quote*
itemP->discount_policy();  //  error: itemP has type Quote*
```

<p><a id="filepos3947510"></a>Even though <code>bulk</code> has a member named <code>discount_policy</code>, that member is not visible through <code>itemP</code>. The type of <code>itemP</code> is a pointer to <code>Quote</code>, which means that the search for <code>discount_policy</code> starts in class <code>Quote</code>. The <code>Quote</code> class has no member named <code>discount_policy</code>, so we cannot call that member on an object, reference, or pointer of type <code>Quote</code>.</p>
<h4>Name Collisions and Inheritance</h4>
<p>Like any other scope, a derived class can reuse a name defined in one of its direct or indirect base classes. As usual, names defined in an inner scope (e.g., a derived class) hide uses of that name in the outer scope (e.g., a base class) (§<a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos382972">2.2.4</a>, p. <a href="022-2.2._variables.html#filepos382972">48</a>):</p>

```c++
struct Base {
    Base(): mem(0) { }
protected:
    int mem;
};
struct Derived : Base {
    Derived(int i): mem(i) { } // initializes Derived::mem to i
                               // Base::mem is default initialized
    int get_mem() { return mem; }  // returns Derived::mem
protected:
    int mem;   // hides mem in the base
};
```

<p>The reference to <code>mem</code> inside <code>get_mem</code> is resolved to the name inside <code>Derived</code>. Were we to write</p>

```c++
Derived d(42);
cout << d.get_mem() << endl;       // prints 42
```

<p>then the output would be <code>42</code>.</p>

::: info
<p>A derived-class member with the same name as a member of the base class hides direct use of the base-class member.</p>
:::

<h4>Using the Scope Operator to Use Hidden Members</h4>
<p>We can use a hidden base-class member by using the scope operator:</p>

```c++
struct Derived : Base {
    int get_base_mem() { return Base::mem; }
    // ...
};
```

<p>The scope operator overrides the normal lookup and directs the compiler to look for <code>mem</code> starting in the scope of class <code>Base</code>. If we ran the code above with this version of <code>Derived</code>, the result of <code>d.get_mem()</code> would be <code>0</code>.</p>

::: tip
<p>Best Practices</p>
<p>Aside from overriding inherited virtual functions, a derived class usually should not reuse names defined in its base class.</p>
:::

::: info
<a id="filepos3953912"></a><p>Key Concept: Name Lookup and Inheritance</p>
<p>Understanding how function calls are resolved is crucial to understanding inheritance in C++. Given the call <code>p-&gt;mem()</code> (or <code>obj.mem()</code>), the following four steps happen:</p>
<ul>
    <li>First determine the static type of <code>p</code> (or <code>obj</code>). Because we’re calling a member, that type must be a class type.</li>
    <li>Look for <code>mem</code> in the class that corresponds to the static type of <code>p</code> (or <code>obj</code>). If <code>mem</code> is not found, look in the direct base class and continue up the chain of classes until <code>mem</code> is found or the last class is searched. If <code>mem</code> is not found in the class or its enclosing base classes, then the call will not compile.</li>
    <li>Once <code>mem</code> is found, do normal type checking (§<a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1415571">6.1</a>, p. <a href="063-6.1._function_basics.html#filepos1415571">203</a>) to see if this call is legal given the definition that was found.</li>
    <li>Assuming the call is legal, the compiler generates code, which varies depending on whether the call is virtual or not:</li>
    <ul>
        <li>If <code>mem</code> is virtual and the call is made through a reference or pointer, then the compiler generates code to determine at run time which version to run based on the dynamic type of the object.</li>
        <li>Otherwise, if the function is nonvirtual, or if the call is on an object (not a reference or pointer), the compiler generates a normal function call.</li>
    </ul>
</ul>
:::

<h4>As Usual, Name Lookup Happens before Type Checking</h4>
<p>As we’ve seen, functions declared in an inner scope do not overload functions declared in an outer scope (§<a href="066-6.4._overloaded_functions.html#filepos1621309">6.4.1</a>, p. <a href="066-6.4._overloaded_functions.html#filepos1621309">234</a>). As a result, functions defined in a derived class do <em>not</em> overload members defined in its base class(es). As in any other scope, if a member in a derived class (i.e., in an inner scope) has the same name as a base-class member (i.e., a name defined in an outer scope), then the derived member hides the base-class member within the scope of the derived class. The base member is hidden even if the functions have different parameter lists:</p>

```c++
struct Base {
    int memfcn();
};
struct Derived : Base {
    int memfcn(int);   // hides memfcn in the base
};
Derived d; Base b;
b.memfcn();       //  calls Base::memfcn
d.memfcn(10);     //  calls Derived::memfcn
d.memfcn();       //  error: memfcn with no arguments is hidden
d.Base::memfcn(); //  ok: calls Base::memfcn
```

<p>The declaration of <code>memfcn</code> in <code>Derived</code> hides the declaration of <code>memfcn</code> in <code>Base</code>. Not surprisingly, the first call through <code>b</code>, which is a <code>Base</code> object, calls the version in the base class. Similarly, the second call (through <code>d</code>) calls the one from <code>Derived</code>. What can be surprising is that the third call, <code>d.memfcn()</code>, is illegal.</p>
<p><a id="filepos3960207"></a>To resolve this call, the compiler looks for the name <code>memfcn</code> in <code>Derived</code>. That class defines a member named <code>memfcn</code> and the search stops. Once the name is found, the compiler looks no further. The version of <code>memfcn</code> in <code>Derived</code> expects an <code>int</code> argument. This call provides no such argument; it is in error.</p>
<h4>Virtual Functions and Scope</h4>
<Badge type="warning" text="Tricky" />
<p>We can now understand why virtual functions must have the same parameter list in the base and derived classes (§<a href="144-15.3._virtual_functions.html#filepos3853256">15.3</a>, p. <a href="144-15.3._virtual_functions.html#filepos3853256">605</a>). If the base and derived members took arguments that differed from one another, there would be no way to call the derived version through a reference or pointer to the base class. For example:</p>

```c++
class Base {
public:
    virtual int fcn();
};
class D1 : public Base {
public:
    // hides fcn in the base; this fcn is not virtual
    // D1 inherits the definition of Base::fcn()
    int fcn(int);      // parameter list differs from fcn in Base
    virtual void f2(); // new virtual function that does not exist in Base
};
class D2 : public D1 {
public:
    int fcn(int); // nonvirtual function hides D1::fcn(int)
    int fcn();    // overrides virtual fcn from Base
    void f2();    // overrides virtual f2 from D1
};
```

<p>The <code>fcn</code> function in <code>D1</code> does not override the virtual <code>fcn</code> from <code>Base</code> because they have different parameter lists. Instead, it <em>hides</em>
<code>fcn</code> from the base. Effectively, <code>D1</code> has two functions named <code>fcn</code>: <code>D1</code> inherits a virtual named <code>fcn</code> from <code>Base</code> and defines its own, nonvirtual member named <code>fcn</code> that takes an <code>int</code> parameter.</p>
<h4>Calling a Hidden Virtual through the Base Class</h4>
<p>Given the classes above, let’s look at several different ways to call these functions:</p>

```c++
Base bobj;  D1 d1obj; D2 d2obj;
Base *bp1 = &bobj, *bp2 = &d1obj, *bp3 = &d2obj;
bp1->fcn(); // virtual call, will call Base::fcn at run time
bp2->fcn(); // virtual call, will call Base::fcn at run time
bp3->fcn(); // virtual call, will call D2::fcn at run time
D1 *d1p = &d1obj; D2 *d2p = &d2obj;
bp2->f2(); // error: Base has no member named f2
d1p->f2(); // virtual call, will call D1::f2() at run time
d2p->f2(); // virtual call, will call D2::f2() at run time
```

<p>The first three calls are all made through pointers to the base class. Because <code>fcn</code> is virtual, the compiler generates code to decide at run time which version to call. <a id="filepos3967935"></a>That decision will be based on the actual type of the object to which the pointer is bound. In the case of <code>bp2</code>, the underlying object is a <code>D1</code>. That class did not override the <code>fcn</code> function that takes no arguments. Thus, the call through <code>bp2</code> is resolved (at run time) to the version defined in <code>Base</code>.</p>
<p>The next three calls are made through pointers with differing types. Each pointer points to one of the types in this hierarchy. The first call is illegal because there is no <code>f2()</code> in class <code>Base</code>. The fact that the pointer happens to point to a derived object is irrelevant.</p>
<p>For completeness, let’s look at calls to the nonvirtual function <code>fcn(int)</code>:</p>

```c++
Base *p1 = &d2obj; D1 *p2 = &d2obj; D2 *p3 =  &d2obj;
p1->fcn(42);  // error: Base has no version of fcn that takes an int
p2->fcn(42);  // statically bound, calls D1::fcn(int)
p3->fcn(42);  // statically bound, calls D2::fcn(int)
```

<p>In each call the pointer happens to point to an object of type <code>D2</code>. However, the dynamic type doesn’t matter when we call a nonvirtual function. The version that is called depends only on the static type of the pointer.</p>
<h4>Overriding Overloaded Functions</h4>
<p>As with any other function, a member function (virtual or otherwise) can be overloaded. A derived class can override zero or more instances of the overloaded functions it inherits. If a derived class wants to make all the overloaded versions available through its type, then it must override all of them or none of them.</p>
<p>Sometimes a class needs to override some, but not all, of the functions in an overloaded set. It would be tedious in such cases to have to override every base-class version in order to override the ones that the class needs to specialize.</p>
<p>Instead of overriding every base-class version that it inherits, a derived class can provide a <code>using</code> declaration (§<a href="146-15.5._access_control_and_inheritance.html#filepos3901534">15.5</a>, p. <a href="146-15.5._access_control_and_inheritance.html#filepos3901534">615</a>) for the overloaded member. A <code>using</code> declaration specifies only a name; it may not specify a parameter list. Thus, a <code>using</code> declaration for a base-class member function adds all the overloaded instances of that function to the scope of the derived class. Having brought all the names into its scope, the derived class needs to define only those functions that truly depend on its type. It can use the inherited definitions for the others.</p>
<p>The normal rules for a <code>using</code> declaration inside a class apply to names of overloaded functions (§<a href="146-15.5._access_control_and_inheritance.html#filepos3901534">15.5</a>, p. <a href="146-15.5._access_control_and_inheritance.html#filepos3901534">615</a>); every overloaded instance of the function in the base class must be accessible to the derived class. The access to the overloaded versions that are not otherwise redefined by the derived class will be the access in effect at the point of the <code>using</code> declaration.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 15.6</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 15.23:</strong> Assuming class <code>D1</code> on page <a href="147-15.6._class_scope_under_inheritance.html#filepos3960207">620</a> had intended to override its inherited <code>fcn</code> function, how would you fix that class? Assuming you fixed the class so that <code>fcn</code> matched the definition in <code>Base</code>, how would the calls in that section be resolved?</p>
:::
