<h3 id="filepos4508634">16.5. Template Specializations</h3>
<Badge type="danger" text="Advanced" />
<p>It is not always possible to write a single template that is best suited for every possible template argument with which the template might be instantiated. In some cases, the general template definition is simply wrong for a type: The general definition might not compile or might do the wrong thing. At other times, we may be able to take advantage of some specific knowledge to write more efficient code than would be instantiated from the template. When we can’t (or don’t want to) use the template version, we can define a specialized version of the class or function template.</p>
<p>Our <code>compare</code> function is a good example of a function template for which the general definition is not appropriate for a particular type, namely, character pointers. We’d like <code>compare</code> to compare character pointers by calling <code>strcmp</code> rather than by comparing the pointer values. Indeed, we have already overloaded the <code>compare</code> function to handle character string literals (§ <a href="154-16.1._defining_a_template.html#filepos4156441">16.1.1</a>, p. <a href="154-16.1._defining_a_template.html#filepos4156441">654</a>):</p>
<p><a id="filepos4510261"></a></p>

```c++
// first version; can compare any two types
template <typename T> int compare(const T&, const T&);
// second version to handle string literals
template<size_t N, size_t M>
int compare(const char (&)[N], const char (&)[M]);
```

<p>However, the version of <code>compare</code> that has two nontype template parameters will be called only when we pass a string literal or an array. If we call <code>compare</code> with character pointers, the first version of the template will be called:</p>

```c++
const char *p1 = "hi", *p2 = "mom";
compare(p1, p2);      // calls the first template
compare("hi", "mom"); // calls the template with two nontype parameters
```

<p>There is no way to convert a pointer to a reference to an array, so the second version of <code>compare</code> is not viable when we pass <code>p1</code> and <code>p2</code> as arguments.</p>
<p>To handle character pointers (as opposed to arrays), we can define a <strong><a href="160-defined_terms.html#filepos4556399" id="filepos4512451">template specialization</a></strong> of the first version of <code>compare</code>. A specialization is a separate definition of the template in which one or more template parameters are specified to have particular types.</p>
<h4>Defining a Function Template Specialization</h4>
<p>When we specialize a function template, we must supply arguments for every template parameter in the original template. To indicate that we are specializing a template, we use the keyword <code>template</code> followed by an empty pair of angle brackets (<code>&lt; &gt;</code>). The empty brackets indicate that arguments will be supplied for all the template parameters of the original template:</p>

```c++
// special version of compare to handle pointers to character arrays
template <>
int compare(const char* const &p1, const char* const &p2)
{
    return strcmp(p1, p2);
}
```

<p>The hard part in understanding this specialization is the function parameter types. When we define a specialization, the function parameter type(s) must match the corresponding types in a previously declared template. Here we are specializing:</p>

```c++
template <typename T> int compare(const T&, const T&);
```

<p>in which the function parameters are references to a <code>const</code> type. As with type aliases, the interaction between template parameter types, pointers, and <code>const</code> can be surprising (§ <a href="025-2.5._dealing_with_types.html#filepos536134">2.5.1</a>, p. <a href="025-2.5._dealing_with_types.html#filepos536134">68</a>).</p>
<p>We want to define a specialization of this function with <code>T</code> as <code>const char*</code>. Our function requires a reference to the <code>const</code> version of this type. The <code>const</code> version of a pointer type is a constant pointer as distinct from a pointer to <code>const</code> (§ <a href="024-2.4._const_qualifier.html#filepos491891">2.4.2</a>, p. <a href="024-2.4._const_qualifier.html#filepos491891">63</a>). The type we need to use in our specialization is <code>const char* const &amp;</code>, which is a reference to a <code>const</code> pointer to <code>const char</code>.</p>
<h4><a id="filepos4516185"></a>Function Overloading versus Template Specializations</h4>
<p>When we define a function template specialization, we are essentially taking over the job of the compiler. That is, we are supplying the definition to use for a specific instantiation of the original template. It is important to realize that a specialization is an instantiation; it is not an overloaded instance of the function name.</p>

::: info
<p>Specializations instantiate a template; they do not overload it. As a result, specializations do not affect function matching.</p>
:::

<p>Whether we define a particular function as a specialization or as an independent, nontemplate function can impact function matching. For example, we have defined two versions of our <code>compare</code> function template, one that takes references to array parameters and the other that takes <code>const T&amp;</code>. The fact that we also have a specialization for character pointers has no impact on function matching. When we call <code>compare</code> on a string literal:</p>

```c++
compare("hi", "mom")
```

<p>both function templates are viable and provide an equally good (i.e., exact) match to the call. However, the version with character array parameters is more specialized (§ <a href="156-16.3._overloading_and_templates.html#filepos4436613">16.3</a>, p. <a href="156-16.3._overloading_and_templates.html#filepos4436613">695</a>) and is chosen for this call.</p>
<p>Had we defined the version of <code>compare</code> that takes character pointers as a plain nontemplate function (rather than as a specialization of the template), this call would resolve differently. In this case, there would be three viable functions: the two templates and the nontemplate character-pointer version. All three are also equally good matches for this call. As we’ve seen, when a nontemplate provides an equally good match as a function template, the nontemplate is selected (§ <a href="156-16.3._overloading_and_templates.html#filepos4436613">16.3</a>, p. <a href="156-16.3._overloading_and_templates.html#filepos4436613">695</a>)</p>

::: tip
<p>Key Concept: Ordinary Scope Rules Apply to Specializations</p>
<p>In order to specialize a template, a declaration for the original template must be in scope. Moreover, a declaration for a specialization must be in scope before any code uses that instantiation of the template.</p>
<p>With ordinary classes and functions, missing declarations are (usually) easy to find—the compiler won’t be able to process our code. However, if a specialization declaration is missing, the compiler will usually generate code using the original template. Because the compiler can often instantiate the original template when a specialization is missing, errors in declaration order between a template and its specializations are easy to make but hard to find.</p>
<p>It is an error for a program to use a specialization and an instantiation of the original template with the same set of template arguments. However, it is an error that the compiler is unlikely to detect.</p>
<p>Best Practices</p>
<p>Templates and their specializations should be declared in the same header file. Declarations for all the templates with a given name should appear first, followed by any specializations of those templates.</p>
:::

<h4><a id="filepos4521059"></a>Class Template Specializations</h4>
<p>In addition to specializing function templates, we can also specialize class templates. As an example, we’ll define a specialization of the library <code>hash</code> template that we can use to store <code>Sales_data</code> objects in an unordered container. By default, the unordered containers use <code>hash&lt;key_type&gt;</code> (§ <a href="110-11.4._the_unordered_containers.html#filepos2872751">11.4</a>, p. <a href="110-11.4._the_unordered_containers.html#filepos2872751">444</a>) to organize their elements. To use this default with our own data type, we must define a specialization of the <code>hash</code> template. A specialized <code>hash</code> class must define</p>
<ul><li>An overloaded call operator (§ <a href="137-14.8._functioncall_operator.html#filepos3657799">14.8</a>, p. <a href="137-14.8._functioncall_operator.html#filepos3657799">571</a>) that returns a <code>size_t</code> and takes an object of the container’s key type</li><li>Two type members, <code>result_type</code> and <code>argument_type</code>, which are the return and argument types, respectively, of the call operator</li><li>The default constructor and a copy-assignment operator (which can be implicitly defined (§ <a href="121-13.1._copy_assign_and_destroy.html#filepos3222083">13.1.2</a>, p. <a href="121-13.1._copy_assign_and_destroy.html#filepos3222083">500</a>))</li></ul>

<p>The only complication in defining this <code>hash</code> specialization is that when we specialize a template, we must do so in the same namespace in which the original template is defined. We’ll have more to say about namespaces in § <a href="172-18.2._namespaces.html#filepos4928252">18.2</a> (p. <a href="172-18.2._namespaces.html#filepos4928252">785</a>). For now, what we need to know is that we can add members to a namespace. To do so, we must first open the namespace:</p>

```c++
// open the std namespace so we can specialize std::hash
namespace std {
}  // close the std namespace; note: no semicolon after the close curly
```

<p>Any definitions that appear between the open and close curlies will be part of the <code>std</code> namespace.</p>
<p>The following defines a specialization of <code>hash</code> for <code>Sales_data</code>:</p>

```c++
// open the std namespace so we can specialize std::hash
namespace std {
template <>           // we're defining a specialization with
struct hash<Sales_data> // the template parameter of Sales_data
{
    // the type used to hash an unordered container must define these types
    typedef size_t result_type;
    typedef Sales_data argument_type; // by default, this type needs ==
    size_t operator()(const Sales_data& s) const;
    // our class uses synthesized copy control and default constructor
};
size_t
hash<Sales_data>::operator()(const Sales_data& s) const
{
    return hash<string>()(s.bookNo) ^
           hash<unsigned>()(s.units_sold) ^
           hash<double>()(s.revenue);
}
} // close the std namespace; note: no semicolon after the close curly
```

<p><a id="filepos4527265"></a>Our <code>hash&lt;Sales_data&gt;</code> definition starts with <code>template&lt;&gt;</code>, which indicates that we are defining a fully specialized template. The template we’re specializing is named <code>hash</code> and the specialized version is <code>hash&lt;Sales_data&gt;</code>. The members of the class follow directly from the requirements for specializing <code>hash</code>.</p>
<p>As with any other class, we can define the members of a specialization inside the class or out of it, as we did here. The overloaded call operator must define a hashing function over the values of the given type. This function is required to return the same result every time it is called for a given value. A good hash function will (almost always) yield different results for objects that are not equal.</p>
<p>Here, we delegate the complexity of defining a good hash function to the library. The library defines specializations of the <code>hash</code> class for the built-in types and for many of the library types. We use an (unnamed) <code>hash&lt;string&gt;</code> object to generate a hash code for <code>bookNo</code>, an object of type <code>hash&lt;unsigned&gt;</code> to generate a hash from <code>units_sold</code>, and an object of type <code>hash&lt;double&gt;</code> to generate a hash from <code>revenue</code>. We exclusive <small>OR</small> (§ <a href="046-4.8._the_bitwise_operators.html#filepos1120642">4.8</a>, p. <a href="046-4.8._the_bitwise_operators.html#filepos1120642">154</a>) these results to form an overall hash code for the given <code>Sales_data</code> object.</p>
<p>It is worth noting that we defined our <code>hash</code> function to hash all three data members so that our <code>hash</code> function will be compatible with our definition of <code>operator==</code> for <code>Sales_data</code> (§ <a href="132-14.3._arithmetic_and_relational_operators.html#filepos3601039">14.3.1</a>, p. <a href="132-14.3._arithmetic_and_relational_operators.html#filepos3601039">561</a>). By default, the unordered containers use the specialization of <code>hash</code> that corresponds to the <code>key_type</code> along with the equality operator on the key type.</p>
<p>Assuming our specialization is in scope, it will be used automatically when we use <code>Sales_data</code> as a key to one of these containers:</p>

```c++
// uses hash<Sales_data> and Sales_data operator==from § 14.3.1 (p. 561)
unordered_multiset<Sales_data> SDset;
```

<p>Because <code>hash&lt;Sales_data&gt;</code> uses the private members of <code>Sales_data</code>, we must make this class a friend of <code>Sales_data</code>:</p>

```c++
template <class T> class std::hash;  // needed for the friend declaration
class Sales_data {
friend class std::hash<Sales_data>;
    // other members as before
};
```

<p>Here we say that the specific instantiation of <code>hash&lt;Sales_data&gt;</code> is a friend. Because that instantiation is defined in the <code>std</code> namespace, we must remember to that this <code>hash</code> type is defined in the <code>std</code> namespace. Hence, our <code>friend</code> declaration refers to <code>std::hash</code>.</p>

::: info
<p>To enable users of <code>Sales_data</code> to use the specialization of <code>hash</code>, we should define this specialization in the <code>Sales_data</code> header.</p>
:::

<h4>Class-Template Partial Specializations</h4>
<p>Differently from function templates, a class template specialization does not have to supply an argument for every template parameter. We can specify some, but not all, of the template parameters or some, but not all, aspects of the parameters. <a id="filepos4534257"></a>A class template <strong><a href="160-defined_terms.html#filepos4553754" id="filepos4534290">partial specialization</a></strong> is itself a template. Users must supply arguments for those template parameters that are not fixed by the specialization.</p>

::: info
<p>We can partially specialize only a class template. We cannot partially specialize a function template.</p>
:::

<p>In § <a href="155-16.2._template_argument_deduction.html#filepos4354202">16.2.3</a> (p. <a href="155-16.2._template_argument_deduction.html#filepos4354202">684</a>) we introduced the library <code>remove_reference</code> type. That template works through a series of specializations:</p>

```c++
// original, most general template
template <class T> struct remove_reference {
    typedef T type;
};
// partial specializations that will be used for lvalue and rvalue references
template <class T> struct remove_reference<T&>  // lvalue references
    { typedef T type; };
template <class T> struct remove_reference<T&&> // rvalue references
    { typedef T type; };
```

<p>The first template defines the most general version. It can be instantiated with any type; it uses its template argument as the type for its member named <code>type</code>. The next two classes are partial specializations of this original template.</p>
<p>Because a partial specialization is a template, we start, as usual, by defining the template parameters. Like any other specialization, a partial specialization has the same name as the template it specializes. The specialization’s template parameter list includes an entry for each template parameter whose type is not completely fixed by this partial specialization. After the class name, we specify arguments for the template parameters we are specializing. These arguments are listed inside angle brackets following the template name. The arguments correspond positionally to the parameters in the original template.</p>
<p>The template parameter list of a partial specialization is a subset of, or a specialization of, the parameter list of the original template. In this case, the specializations have the same number of parameters as the original template. However, the parameter’s type in the specializations differ from the original template. The specializations will be used for lvalue and rvalue reference types, respectively:</p>

```c++
int i;
// decltype(42) is int, uses the original template
remove_reference<decltype(42)>::type a;
// decltype(i) is int&, uses first (T&) partial specialization
remove_reference<decltype(i)>::type b;
// decltype(std::move(i)) is int&&, uses second (i.e., T&&) partial specialization
remove_reference<decltype(std::move(i))>::type c;
```

<p>All three variables, <code>a, b</code>, and <code>c</code>, have type <code>int</code>.</p>
<h4>Specializing Members but Not the Class</h4>
<p>Rather than specializing the whole template, we can specialize just specific member function(s). For example, if <code>Foo</code> is a template class with a member <code>Bar</code>, we can <a id="filepos4540179"></a>specialize just that member:</p>

```c++
template <typename T> struct Foo {
    Foo(const T &t = T()): mem(t) { }
    void Bar() { /* ... */ }
    T mem;
    // other members of Foo
};
template<>           // we're specializing a template
void Foo<int>::Bar() // we're specializing the Bar member of Foo<int>
{
     // do whatever specialized processing that applies to ints
}
```

<p>Here we are specializing just one member of the <code>Foo&lt;int&gt;</code> class. The other members of <code>Foo&lt;int&gt;</code> will be supplied by the <code>Foo</code> template:</p>

```c++
Foo<string> fs;  // instantiates Foo<string>::Foo()
fs.Bar();        // instantiates Foo<string>::Bar()
Foo<int> fi;     // instantiates Foo<int>::Foo()
fi.Bar();        // uses our specialization of Foo<int>::Bar()
```

<p>When we use <code>Foo</code> with any type other than <code>int</code>, members are instantiated as usual. When we use <code>Foo</code> with <code>int</code>, members other than <code>Bar</code> are instantiated as usual. If we use the <code>Bar</code> member of <code>Foo&lt;int&gt;</code>, then we get our specialized definition.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 16.5</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 16.62:</strong> Define your own version of <code>hash&lt;Sales_data&gt;</code> and define an <code>unordered_multiset</code> of <code>Sales_data</code> objects. Put several transactions into the container and print its contents.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 16.63:</strong> Define a function template to count the number of occurrences of a given value in a <code>vector</code>. Test your program by passing it a <code>vector</code> of <code>double</code>s, a <code>vector</code> of <code>int</code>s, and a <code>vector</code> of <code>string</code>s.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 16.64:</strong> Write a specialized version of the template from the previous exercise to handle <code>vector&lt;const char*</code>&gt; and a program that uses this specialization.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 16.65:</strong> In § <a href="156-16.3._overloading_and_templates.html#filepos4436613">16.3</a> (p. <a href="156-16.3._overloading_and_templates.html#filepos4436613">698</a>) we defined overloaded two versions of <code>debug_rep</code> one had a <code>const char*</code> and the other a <code>char*</code> parameter. Rewrite these functions as specializations.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 16.66:</strong> What are the advantages and disadvantages of overloading these <code>debug_rep</code> functions as compared to defining specializations?</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 16.67:</strong> Would defining these specializations affect function matching for <code>debug_rep</code>? If so, how? If not, why not?</p>
:::
