<h3 id="filepos4548885">Defined Terms</h3><ul><li><p><a href="154-16.1._defining_a_template.html#filepos4193364" id="filepos4549024"><strong>class template</strong></a> Definition from which specific classes can be instantiated. Class templates are defined using the <code>template</code> keyword followed by a comma-separated list of one or more template parameters enclosed in <code>&lt;</code> and <code>&gt;</code> brackets, followed by a class definition.</p></li><li><p><a href="154-16.1._defining_a_template.html#filepos4272100" id="filepos4549642"><strong>default template arguments</strong></a> A type or a value that a template uses if the user does not supply a corresponding template argument.</p></li><li><p><a href="154-16.1._defining_a_template.html#filepos4302470" id="filepos4549932"><strong>explicit instantiation</strong></a> A declaration that supplies explicit arguments for all the template parameters. Used to guide the instantiation process. If the declaration is <code>extern</code>, the template will not be instantiated; otherwise, the template is instantiated with the specified arguments. There must be a non<code>extern</code> explicit instantiation somewhere in the program for every <code>extern</code> template declaration.</p></li><li><p><a href="155-16.2._template_argument_deduction.html#filepos4346395" id="filepos4550678"><strong>explicit template argument</strong></a> Template argument supplied by the user in a call to a function or when defining a template class type. Explicit template arguments are supplied inside angle brackets immediately following the template’s name.</p></li><li><p><a href="157-16.4._variadic_templates.html#filepos4465521" id="filepos4551081"><strong>function parameter pack</strong></a> Parameter pack that represents zero or more function parameters.</p></li><li><p><a href="154-16.1._defining_a_template.html#filepos4156704" id="filepos4551331"><strong>function template</strong></a> Definition from which specific functions can be instantiated. A function template is defined using the <code>template</code> keyword followed by a comma-separated list of one or more template parameters enclosed in <code>&lt;</code> and <code>&gt;</code> brackets, followed by a function definition.</p></li><li><p><a href="154-16.1._defining_a_template.html#filepos4161538" id="filepos4551960"><strong>instantiate</strong></a> Compiler process whereby the actual template argument(s) are used to generate a specific instance of the template in which the parameter(s) are replaced by the corresponding argument(s). Functions are instantiated automatically based on the arguments used in a call. We must supply explicit template arguments whenever we use a class template.</p></li><li><p><a id="filepos4552477"></a><a href="154-16.1._defining_a_template.html#filepos4164596" id="filepos4552485"><strong>instantiation</strong></a> Class or function generated by the compiler from a template.</p></li><li><p><a href="154-16.1._defining_a_template.html#filepos4284048" id="filepos4552721"><strong>member template</strong></a> Member function that is a template. A member template may not be virtual.</p></li><li><p><a href="154-16.1._defining_a_template.html#filepos4169325" id="filepos4552972"><strong>nontype parameter</strong></a> A template parameter that represents a value. Template arguments for nontype template parameters must be constant expressions.</p></li><li><p><strong>pack expansion</strong> Process by which a parameter pack is replaced by the corresponding list of its elements.</p></li><li><p><a href="157-16.4._variadic_templates.html#filepos4465258" id="filepos4553506"><strong>parameter pack</strong></a> Template or function parameter that represents zero or more parameters.</p></li><li><p><a href="158-16.5._template_specializations.html#filepos4534290" id="filepos4553754"><strong>partial specialization</strong></a> Version of a class template in which some some but not all of the template parameters are specified or in which one or more parameters are not completely specified.</p></li><li><p><a href="157-16.4._variadic_templates.html#filepos4483236" id="filepos4554103"><strong>pattern</strong></a> Defines the form of each element in an expanded parameter pack.</p></li><li><p><a href="154-16.1._defining_a_template.html#filepos4159089" id="filepos4554336"><strong>template argument</strong></a> Type or value used to instantiate a template parameter.</p></li><li><p><a href="155-16.2._template_argument_deduction.html#filepos4324590" id="filepos4554571"><strong>template argument deduction</strong></a> Process by which the compiler determines which function template to instantiate. The compiler examines the types of the arguments that were specified using a template parameter. It automatically instantiates a version of the function with those types or values bound to the template parameters.</p></li><li><p><a href="154-16.1._defining_a_template.html#filepos4157851" id="filepos4555055"><strong>template parameter</strong></a> Name specifed in the template parameter list that may be used inside the definition of a template. Template parameters can be type or nontype parameters. To use a class template, we must supply explicit arguments for each template parameter. The compiler uses those types or values to instantiate a version of the class in which uses of the parameter(s) are replaced by the actual argument(s). When a function template is used, the compiler deduces the template arguments from the arguments in the call and instantiates a specific function using the deduced template arguments.</p></li><li><p><a href="154-16.1._defining_a_template.html#filepos4157718" id="filepos4555813"><strong>template parameter list</strong></a> List of parameters, separated by commas, to be used in the definition or declaration of a template. Each parameter may be a type or nontype parameter.</p></li><li><p><a href="157-16.4._variadic_templates.html#filepos4465377" id="filepos4556149"><strong>template parameter pack</strong></a> Parameter pack that represents zero or more template parameters.</p></li><li><p><a href="158-16.5._template_specializations.html#filepos4512451" id="filepos4556399"><strong>template specialization</strong></a> Redefinition of a class template, a member of a class template, or a function template, in which some (or all) of the template parameters are specified. A template specialization may not appear until after the base template that it specializes has been declared. A template specialization must appear before any use of the template with the specialized arguments. Each template parameter in a function template must be completely specialized.</p></li><li><p><a href="154-16.1._defining_a_template.html#filepos4164949" id="filepos4557027"><strong>type parameter</strong></a> Name used in a template parameter list to represent a type. Type parameters are specified following the keyword <code>typename</code> or <code>class</code>.</p></li><li><p><a href="155-16.2._template_argument_deduction.html#filepos4360331" id="filepos4557460"><strong>type transformation</strong></a> Class templates defined by the library that transform their given template type parameter to a related type.</p></li><li><p><a href="157-16.4._variadic_templates.html#filepos4465063" id="filepos4557750"><strong>variadic template</strong></a> Template that takes a varying number of template arguments. A template parameter pack is specified using an elipsis (e.g., <code>class</code>. . ., <code>typename</code>. . ., or <em>type-name</em>. . . ).</p></li>
 
</ul>
