<h3 id="filepos4842336">Defined Terms</h3><ul><li><p><a href="164-17.2._the_bitset_type.html#filepos4603754" id="filepos4842475"><strong>bitset</strong></a> Standard library class that holds a collection of bits of a size that is known at compile time, and provides operations to test and set the bits in the collection.</p></li><li><p><strong>cmatch</strong> Container of <code>csub_match</code> objects that provides information about the match to a <code>regex</code> on <code>const char*</code> input sequences. The first element in the container describes the overall match results. The subsequent elements describe the results for the subexpressions.</p></li><li><p><strong>cregex_iterator</strong> Like <code>sregex_iterator</code> except that it iterates over an array of <code>char</code>.</p></li><li><p><strong>csub_match</strong> Type that holds the results of a regular expression match to a <code>const char*</code>. Can represent the entire match or a subexpression.</p></li><li><p><a href="166-17.4._random_numbers.html#filepos4718264" id="filepos4844044"><strong>default random engine</strong></a> Type alias for the random number engine intended for normal use.</p></li><li><p><a href="167-17.5._the_io_library_revisited.html#filepos4797466" id="filepos4844292"><strong>formatted IO</strong></a> IO operations that use the types of the objects being read or written to define the actions of the operations. Formatted <a id="filepos4844488"></a>input operations perform whatever transformations are appropriate to the type being read, such as converting ASCII numeric strings to the indicated arithmetic type and (by default) ignoring whitespace. Formatted output routines convert types to printable character representations, pad the output, and may perform other, type-specific transformations.</p></li><li><p><a href="163-17.1._the_tuple_type.html#filepos4574548" id="filepos4844947"><strong>get</strong></a> Template function that returns the specified member for a given tuple. For example, <code>get&lt;0&gt;(t)</code> returns the first element from the <code>tuple t</code>.</p></li><li><p><a href="164-17.2._the_bitset_type.html#filepos4607371" id="filepos4845382"><strong>high-order</strong></a> Bits in a <code>bitset</code> with the largest indices.</p></li><li><p><a href="164-17.2._the_bitset_type.html#filepos4607189" id="filepos4845660"><strong>low-order</strong></a> Bits in a <code>bitset</code> with the lowest indices.</p></li><li><p><a href="167-17.5._the_io_library_revisited.html#filepos4758578" id="filepos4845936"><strong>manipulator</strong></a> A function-like object that “manipulates” a stream. Manipulators can be used as the right-hand operand to the overloaded IO operators, <code>&lt;&lt;</code> and <code>&gt;&gt;</code>. Most manipulators change the internal state of the object. Such manipulators often come in pairs—one to change the state and the other to return the stream to its default state.</p></li><li><p><strong>random-number distribution</strong> Standard library type that transforms the output of a random-number engine according to its named distribution. For example, <code>uniform_int_distribution&lt;T&gt;</code> generates uniformly distributed integers of type <code>T</code>, <code>normal_distribution&lt;T&gt;</code> generates normally distributed numbers, and so on.</p></li><li><p><strong>random-number engine</strong> Library type that generates random unsigned numbers. Engines are intended to be used only as inputs to random-number distributions.</p></li><li><p><strong>random-number generator</strong> Combination of a random-number engine type and a distribution type.</p></li><li><p><a href="165-17.3._regular_expressions.html#filepos4637022" id="filepos4847713"><strong>regex</strong></a> Class that manages a regular expression.</p></li><li><p><a href="165-17.3._regular_expressions.html#filepos4652948" id="filepos4847921"><strong>regex_error</strong></a> Exception type thrown to indicate a syntactic error in a regular expression.</p></li><li><p><a href="165-17.3._regular_expressions.html#filepos4637627" id="filepos4848171"><strong>regex_match</strong></a> Function that determines whether the entire input sequence matches the given <code>regex</code> object.</p></li><li><p><a href="165-17.3._regular_expressions.html#filepos4700781" id="filepos4848498"><strong>regex_replace</strong></a> Function that uses a <code>regex</code> object to replace matching subexpressions in an input sequence using a given format.</p></li><li><p><a href="165-17.3._regular_expressions.html#filepos4637816" id="filepos4848848"><strong>regex_search</strong></a> Function that uses a <code>regex</code> object to find a matching subsequence of a given input sequence.</p></li><li><p><a href="165-17.3._regular_expressions.html#filepos4635461" id="filepos4849177"><strong>regular expression</strong></a> A way of describing a sequence of characters.</p></li><li><p><a href="166-17.4._random_numbers.html#filepos4732550" id="filepos4849403"><strong>seed</strong></a> Value supplied to a random-number engine that causes it to move to a new point in the sequence of number that it generates.</p></li><li><p><a href="165-17.3._regular_expressions.html#filepos4639167" id="filepos4849693"><strong>smatch</strong></a> Container of <code>ssub_match</code> objects that provides information about the match to a <code>regex</code> on <code>string</code> input sequences. The first element in the container describes the overall match results. The subsequent elements describe the results for the subexpressions.</p></li><li><p><a href="165-17.3._regular_expressions.html#filepos4664310" id="filepos4850303"><strong>sregex_iterator</strong></a> Iterator that iterates over a <code>string</code> using a given <code>regex</code> object to find matches in the given <code>string</code>. The constructor positions the iterator on the first match by calling <code>regex_search</code>. Incrementing the iterator calls <code>regex_search</code> starting just after the current match in the given <code>string</code>. Dereferencing the iterator returns an <code>smatch</code> object describing the current match.</p></li><li><p><a href="165-17.3._regular_expressions.html#filepos4674131" id="filepos4851291"><strong>ssub_match</strong></a> Type that holds results of a regular expression match to a <code>string</code>. Can represent the entire match or a subexpression.</p></li><li><p><a href="165-17.3._regular_expressions.html#filepos4680182" id="filepos4851644"><strong>subexpression</strong></a> Parenthesized component of a regular expression pattern.</p></li><li><p><a href="163-17.1._the_tuple_type.html#filepos4566611" id="filepos4851876"><strong>tuple</strong></a> Template that generates types that hold unnamed members of specified types. There is no fixed limit on the number of members a <code>tuple</code> can be defined to have.</p></li><li><p><a href="167-17.5._the_io_library_revisited.html#filepos4798035" id="filepos4852263"><strong>unformatted IO</strong></a> Operations that treat the stream as an undifferentiated byte stream. Unformatted operations place more of the burden for managing the IO on the user.</p></li>
 
</ul>
