<h3 id="filepos5124326">19.1. Controlling Memory Allocation</h3>
<p>Some applications have specialized memory allocation needs that cannot be met by the standard memory management facilities. Such applications need to take over the details of how memory is allocated, for example, by arranging for <code>new</code> to put objects into particular kinds of memory. To do so, they can overload the <code>new</code> and <code>delete</code> operators to control memory allocation.</p>
<h4 id="filepos5125048">19.1.1. Overloading <code>new</code> and <code>delete</code></h4>
<p>Although we say that we can “overload <code>new</code> and <code>delete</code>,” overloading these operators is quite different from the way we overload other operators. In order to understand how we overload these operators, we first need to know a bit more about how <code>new</code> and <code>delete</code> expressions work.</p>
<p>When we use a <code>new</code> expression:</p>

```c++
// new expressions
string *sp = new string("a value"); // allocate and initialize a string
string *arr = new string[10];  // allocate ten default initialized strings
```

<p>three steps actually happen. First, the expression calls a library function named <code>operator new</code> (or <code>operator new[]</code>). This function allocates raw, untyped memory large enough to hold an object (or an array of objects) of the specified type. Next, the compiler runs the appropriate constructor to construct the object(s) from the specified initializers. Finally, a pointer to the newly allocated and constructed object is returned.</p>
<p>When we use a <code>delete</code> expression to delete a dynamically allocated object:</p>

```c++
delete sp;        // destroy *sp and free the memory to which sp points
delete [] arr;    // destroy the elements in the array and free the memory
```

<p>two steps happen. First, the appropriate destructor is run on the object to which <code>sp</code> points or on the elements in the array to which <code>arr</code> points. Next, the compiler frees the memory by calling a library function named <code>operator delete</code> or <code>operator delete[]</code>, respectively.</p>
<p>Applications that want to take control of memory allocation define their own versions of the <code>operator new</code> and <code>operator delete</code> functions. Even though the library contains definitions for these functions, we can define our own versions of them and the compiler won’t complain about duplicate definitions. Instead, the compiler will use our version in place of the one defined by the library.</p>

::: warning
<a id="filepos5130378"></a>
<p>When we define the global <code>operator new</code> and <code>operator delete</code> functions, we take over responsibility for all dynamic memory allocation. These functions <em>must</em> be correct: They form a vital part of all processing in the program.</p>
:::

<p>Applications can define <code>operator new</code> and <code>operator delete</code> functions in the global scope and/or as member functions. When the compiler sees a <code>new</code> or <code>delete</code> expression, it looks for the corresponding <code>operator</code> function to call. If the object being allocated (deallocated) has class type, the compiler first looks in the scope of the class, including any base classes. If the class has a member <code>operator new</code> or <code>operator delete</code>, that function is used by the <code>new</code> or <code>delete</code> expression. Otherwise, the compiler looks for a matching function in the global scope. If the compiler finds a user-defined version, it uses that function to execute the <code>new</code> or <code>delete</code> expression. Otherwise, the standard library version is used.</p>
<p>We can use the scope operator to force a <code>new</code> or <code>delete</code> expression to bypass a class-specific function and use the one from the global scope. For example, <code>::new</code> will look only in the global scope for a matching <code>operator new</code> function. Similarly for <code>::delete</code>.</p>
<h5>The <code>operator new</code> and <code>operator delete</code> Interface</h5>
<p>The library defines eight overloaded versions of <code>operator new</code> and <code>delete</code> functions. The first four support the versions of <code>new</code> that can throw a <code>bad_alloc</code> exception. The next four support nonthrowing versions of <code>new</code>:</p>

```c++
// these versions might throw an exception
void *operator new(size_t);              // allocate an object
void *operator new[](size_t);            // allocate an array
void *operator delete(void*) noexcept;   // free an object
void *operator delete[](void*) noexcept; // free an array

// versions that promise not to throw; see § 12.1.2 (p. 460)
void *operator new(size_t, nothrow_t&) noexcept;
void *operator new[](size_t, nothrow_t&) noexcept;
void *operator delete(void*, nothrow_t&) noexcept;
void *operator delete[](void*, nothrow_t&) noexcept;
```

<p>The type <code>nothrow_t</code> is a <code>struct</code> defined in the <code>new</code> header. This type has no members. The <code>new</code> header also defines a <code>const</code> object named <code>nothrow</code>, which users can pass to signal they want the nonthrowing version of <code>new</code> (§ <a href="114-12.1._dynamic_memory_and_smart_pointers.html#filepos2959483">12.1.2</a>, p. <a href="114-12.1._dynamic_memory_and_smart_pointers.html#filepos2959483">460</a>). Like destructors, an <code>operator delete</code> must not throw an exception (§ <a href="171-18.1._exception_handling.html#filepos4856427">18.1.1</a>, p. <a href="171-18.1._exception_handling.html#filepos4856427">774</a>). When we overload these operators, we must specify that they will not throw, which we do through the <code>noexcept</code> exception specifier (§ <a href="171-18.1._exception_handling.html#filepos4896504">18.1.4</a>, p. <a href="171-18.1._exception_handling.html#filepos4896504">779</a>).</p>
<p>An application can define its own version of any of these functions. If it does so, it must define these functions in the global scope or as members of a class. When defined as members of a class, these operator functions are implicitly static (§ <a href="078-7.6._static_class_members.html#filepos2028441">7.6</a>, p. <a href="078-7.6._static_class_members.html#filepos2028441">302</a>). There is no need to declare them <code>static</code> explicitly, although it is legal to do so. The member <code>new</code> and <code>delete</code> functions must be static because they are used either before the object is constructed <code>(operator new)</code> or after it has been <a id="filepos5137632"></a>destroyed <code>(operator delete)</code>. There are, therefore, no member data for these functions to manipulate.</p>
<p>An <code>operator new</code> or <code>operator new[]</code> function must have a return type of <code>void*</code> and its first parameter must have type <code>size_t</code>. That parameter may not have a default argument. The <code>operator new</code> function is used when we allocate an object; <code>operator new[]</code> is called when we allocate an array. When the compiler calls <code>operator new</code>, it initializes the <code>size_t</code> parameter with the number of bytes required to hold an object of the specified type; when it calls <code>operator new[]</code>, it passes the number of bytes required to store an array of the given number of elements.</p>
<p>When we define our own <code>operator new</code> function, we can define additional parameters. A <code>new</code> expression that uses such functions must use the placement form of <code>new</code> (§ <a href="114-12.1._dynamic_memory_and_smart_pointers.html#filepos2959483">12.1.2</a>, p. <a href="114-12.1._dynamic_memory_and_smart_pointers.html#filepos2959483">460</a>) to pass arguments to these additional parameters. Although generally we may define our version of <code>operator new</code> to have whatever parameters are needed, we may not define a function with the following form:</p>

```c++
void *operator new(size_t, void*); // this version may not be redefined
```

<p>This specific form is reserved for use by the library and may not be redefined.</p>
<p>An <code>operator delete</code> or <code>operator delete[]</code> function must have a <code>void</code> return type and a first parameter of type <code>void*</code>. Executing a <code>delete</code> expression calls the appropriate <code>operator</code> function and initializes its <code>void*</code> parameter with a pointer to the memory to free.</p>
<p>When <code>operator delete</code> or <code>operator delete[]</code> is defined as a class member, the function may have a second parameter of type <code>size_t</code>. If present, the additional parameter is initialized with the size in bytes of the object addressed by the first parameter. The <code>size_t</code> parameter is used when we delete objects that are part of an inheritance hierarchy. If the base class has a virtual destructor (§ <a href="148-15.7._constructors_and_copy_control.html#filepos3974566">15.7.1</a>, p. <a href="148-15.7._constructors_and_copy_control.html#filepos3974566">622</a>), then the size passed to <code>operator delete</code> will vary depending on the dynamic type of the object to which the deleted pointer points. Moreover, the version of the <code>operator delete</code> function that is run will be the one from the dynamic type of the object.</p>

::: info
<p>Terminology: <code>new</code> Expression versus <code>operator new</code> Function</p>
<p>The library functions <code>operator new</code> and <code>operator delete</code> are misleadingly named. Unlike other <code>operator</code> functions, such as <code>operator=</code>, these functions do not overload the <code>new</code> or <code>delete</code> expressions. In fact, we cannot redefine the behavior of the <code>new</code> and <code>delete</code> expressions.</p>
<p>A <code>new</code> expression always executes by calling an <code>operator new</code> function to obtain memory and then constructing an object in that memory. A <code>delete</code> expression always executes by destroying an object and then calling an <code>operator delete</code> function to free the memory used by the object.</p>
<p>By providing our own definitions of the <code>operator new</code> and <code>operator delete</code> functions, we can change how memory is allocated. However, we cannot change this basic meaning of the <code>new</code> and <code>delete</code> operators.</p>
:::

<h5><a id="filepos5144765"></a>The <code>malloc</code> and <code>free</code> Functions</h5>
<p>If you define your own global <code>operator new</code> and <code>operator delete</code>, those functions must allocate and deallocate memory somehow. Even if you define these functions in order to use a specialized memory allocator, it can still be useful for testing purposes to be able to allocate memory similarly to how the implementation normally does so.</p>
<p>To this end, we can use functions named <code>malloc</code> and <code>free</code> that C++ inherits from C. These functions, are defined in <code>cstdlib</code>.</p>
<p>The <code>malloc</code> function takes a <code>size_t</code> that says how many bytes to allocate. It returns a pointer to the memory that it allocated, or 0 if it was unable to allocate the memory. The <code>free</code> function takes a <code>void*</code> that is a copy of a pointer that was returned from <code>malloc</code> and returns the associated memory to the system. Calling <code>free(0)</code> has no effect.</p>
<p>A simple way to write <code>operator new</code> and <code>operator delete</code> is as follows:</p>

```c++
void *operator new(size_t size) {
    if (void *mem = malloc(size))
        return mem;
    else
        throw bad_alloc();
}
void operator delete(void *mem) noexcept { free(mem); }
```

<p>and similarly for the other versions of <code>operator new</code> and <code>operator delete</code>.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 19.1.1</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 19.1:</strong> Write your own <code>operator new(size_t)</code> function using <code>malloc</code> and use <code>free</code> to write the <code>operator delete(void*)</code> function.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 19.2:</strong> By default, the <code>allocator</code> class uses <code>operator new</code> to obtain storage and <code>operator delete</code> to free it. Recompile and rerun your <code>StrVec</code> programs (§ <a href="125-13.5._classes_that_manage_dynamic_memory.html#filepos3380687">13.5</a>, p. <a href="125-13.5._classes_that_manage_dynamic_memory.html#filepos3380687">526</a>) using your versions of the functions from the previous exercise.</p>
:::

<h4 id="filepos5149502">19.1.2. Placement <code>new</code> Expressions</h4>
<p>Although the <code>operator new</code> and <code>operator delete</code> functions are intended to be used by <code>new</code> expressions, they are ordinary functions in the library. As a result, ordinary code can call these functions directly.</p>
<p>In earlier versions of the language—before the <code>allocator</code> (§ <a href="115-12.2._dynamic_arrays.html#filepos3119523">12.2.2</a>, p. <a href="115-12.2._dynamic_arrays.html#filepos3119523">481</a>) class was part of the library—applications that wanted to separate allocation from initialization did so by calling <code>operator new</code> and <code>operator delete</code>. These functions behave analogously to the <code>allocate</code> and <code>deallocate</code> members of <code>allocator</code>. Like those members, <code>operator new</code> and <code>operator delete</code> functions allocate and deallocate memory but do not construct or destroy objects.</p>
<p><a id="filepos5151315"></a>Differently from an <code>allocator</code>, there is no <code>construct</code> function we can call to construct objects in memory allocated by <code>operator new</code>. Instead, we use the <strong>placement</strong>
<code>new</code> form of <code>new</code> (§ <a href="114-12.1._dynamic_memory_and_smart_pointers.html#filepos2959483">12.1.2</a>, p. <a href="114-12.1._dynamic_memory_and_smart_pointers.html#filepos2959483">460</a>) to construct an object. As we’ve seen, this form of <code>new</code> provides extra information to the allocation function. We can use placement <code>new</code> to pass an address, in which case the placement <code>new</code> expression has the form</p>

```c++
new (place_address) type
new (place_address) type (initializers)
new (place_address) type [size]
new (place_address) type [size] { braced initializer list }
```

<p>where <em>place_address</em> must be a pointer and the <em>initializers</em> provide (a possibly empty) comma-separated list of initializers to use to construct the newly allocated object.</p>
<p>When called with an address and no other arguments, placement <code>new</code> uses <code>operator new(size_t, void*)</code> to “allocate” its memory. This is the version of <code>operator new</code> that we are not allowed to redefine (§ <a href="177-19.1._controlling_memory_allocation.html#filepos5125048">19.1.1</a>, p. <a href="177-19.1._controlling_memory_allocation.html#filepos5125048">822</a>). This function does <em>not</em> allocate any memory; it simply returns its pointer argument. The overall <code>new</code> expression then finishes its work by initializing an object at the given address. In effect, placement <code>new</code> allows us to construct an object at a specific, preallocated memory address.</p>

::: info
<p>When passed a single argument that is a pointer, a placement <code>new</code> expression constructs an object but does not allocate memory.</p>
:::

<p>Although in many ways using placement <code>new</code> is analogous to the <code>construct</code> member of an <code>allocator</code>, there is one important difference. The pointer that we pass to <code>construct</code> must point to space allocated by the same <code>allocator</code> object. The pointer that we pass to placement <code>new</code> need not point to memory allocated by <code>operator new</code>. Indeed, as we’ll see in § <a href="182-19.6._union_a_spacesaving_class.html#filepos5306482">19.6</a> (p. <a href="182-19.6._union_a_spacesaving_class.html#filepos5306482">851</a>), the pointer passed to a placement <code>new</code> expression need not even refer to dynamic memory.</p>
<h5>Explicit Destructor Invocation</h5>
<p>Just as placement <code>new</code> is analogous to using <code>allocate</code>, an explicit call to a destructor is analogous to calling <code>destroy</code>. We call a destructor the same way we call any other member function on an object or through a pointer or reference to an object:</p>

```c++
string *sp = new string("a value"); // allocate and initialize a string
sp->~string();
```

<p>Here we invoke a destructor directly. The arrow operator dereferences the pointer <code>sp</code> to obtain the object to which <code>sp</code> points. We then call the destructor, which is the name of the type preceded by a tilde (<code>~</code>).</p>
<p>Like calling <code>destroy</code>, calling a destructor cleans up the given object but does not free the space in which that object resides. We can reuse the space if desired.</p>

::: info
<p>Calling a destructor destroys an object but does not free the memory.</p>
:::
