---
title: 19.6. union: A Space-Saving Class
---

<h3 id="filepos5306482">19.6. <code>union</code>: A Space-Saving Class</h3>
<p>A <code>union</code> is a special kind of class. A <code>union</code> may have multiple data members, but at any point in time, only one of the members may have a value. When a value is assigned to one member of the <code>union</code>, all other members become undefined. The amount of storage allocated for a <code>union</code> is at least as much as is needed to contain its largest data member. Like any class, a <code>union</code> defines a new type.</p>
<p>Some, but not all, class features apply equally to <code>union</code>s. A <code>union</code> cannot have a member that is a reference, but it can have members of most other types, including, under the new standard, class types that have constructors or destructors. A <code>union</code> can specify protection labels to make members <code>public</code>, <code>private</code>, or <code>protected</code>. By default, like <code>struct</code>s, members of a <code>union</code> are <code>public</code>.</p>
<p>A <code>union</code> may define member functions, including constructors and destructors. However, a <code>union</code> may not inherit from another class, nor may a <code>union</code> be used as a base class. As a result, a <code>union</code> may not have virtual functions.</p>
<h4>Defining a <code>union</code></h4>
<p><code>union</code>s offer a convenient way to represent a set of mutually exclusive values of different types. As an example, we might have a process that handles different kinds of numeric or character data. That process might define a <code>union</code> to hold these values:</p>

```c++
// objects of type Token have a single member, which could be of any of the listed types
union Token {
// members are public by default
    char   cval;
    int    ival;
    double dval;
};
```

<p>A <code>union</code> is defined starting with the keyword <code>union</code>, followed by an (optional) name for the <code>union</code> and a set of member declarations enclosed in curly braces. This code defines a <code>union</code> named <code>Token</code> that can hold a value that is either a <code>char</code>, an <code>int</code>, or a <code>double</code>.</p>
<h4><a id="filepos5311636"></a>Using a <code>union</code> Type</h4>
<p>The name of a <code>union</code> is a type name. Like the built-in types, by default <code>union</code>s are uninitialized. We can explicitly initialize a <code>union</code> in the same way that we can explicitly initialize aggregate classes (§ <a href="077-7.5._constructors_revisited.html#filepos2013562">7.5.5</a>, p. <a href="077-7.5._constructors_revisited.html#filepos2013562">298</a>) by enclosing the initializer in a pair of curly braces:</p>

```c++
Token first_token = {'a'}; // initializes the cval member
Token last_token;          // uninitialized Token object
Token *pt = new Token;     // pointer to an uninitialized Token object
```

<p>If an initializer is present, it is used to initialize the first member. Hence, the initialization of <code>first_token</code> gives a value to its <code>cval</code> member.</p>
<p>The members of an object of <code>union</code> type are accessed using the normal member access operators:</p>

```c++
last_token.cval = 'z';
pt->ival = 42;
```

<p>Assigning a value to a data member of a <code>union</code> object makes the other data members undefined. As a result, when we use a <code>union</code>, we must always know what type of value is currently stored in the <code>union</code>. Depending on the types of the members, retrieving or assigning to the value stored in the <code>union</code> through the wrong data member can lead to a crash or other incorrect program behavior.</p>
<h4>Anonymous <code>union</code>s</h4>
<p>An <a href="186-defined_terms.html#filepos5398786" id="filepos5315300"><strong>anonymous</strong>
<code>union</code></a> is an unnamed <code>union</code> that does not include any declarations between the close curly that ends its body and the semicolon that ends the <code>union</code> definition (§ <a href="026-2.6._defining_our_own_data_structures.html#filepos578460">2.6.1</a>, p. <a href="026-2.6._defining_our_own_data_structures.html#filepos578460">73</a>). When we define an anonymous <code>union</code> the compiler automatically creates an unnamed object of the newly defined <code>union</code> type:</p>

```c++
union {           // anonymous union
    char   cval;
    int    ival;
    double dval;
};  // defines an unnamed object, whose members we can access directly
cval = 'c'; // assigns a new value to the unnamed, anonymous union object
ival = 42;  // that object now holds the value 42
```

<p>The members of an anonymous <code>union</code> are directly accessible in the scope where the anonymous <code>union</code> is defined.</p>

::: info
<p>An anonymous <code>union</code> cannot have <code>private</code> or <code>protected</code> members, nor can an anonymous <code>union</code> define member functions.</p>
:::

<h4><code>union</code>s with Members of Class Type</h4>
<a id="filepos5318655"></a><Badge type="tip" text="C++11" />
<p>Under earlier versions of C++, <code>union</code>s could not have members of a class type that defined its own constructors or copy-control members. Under the new standard, this restriction is lifted. However, <code>union</code>s with members that define their <a id="filepos5319103"></a>own constructors and/or copy-control members are more complicated to use than <code>union</code>s that have members of built-in type.</p>
<p>When a <code>union</code> has members of built-in type, we can use ordinary assignment to change the value that the <code>union</code> holds. Not so for <code>union</code>s that have members of nontrivial class types. When we switch the <code>union</code>’s value to and from a member of class type, we must construct or destroy that member, respectively: When we switch the <code>union</code> to a member of class type, we must run a constructor for that member’s type; when we switch from that member, we must run its destructor.</p>
<p>When a <code>union</code> has members of built-in type, the compiler will synthesize the memberwise versions of the default constructor or copy-control members. The same is not true for <code>union</code>s that have members of a class type that defines its own default constructor or one or more of the copy-control members. If a <code>union</code> member’s type defines one of these members, the compiler synthesizes the corresponding member of the <code>union</code> as deleted (§ <a href="121-13.1._copy_assign_and_destroy.html#filepos3263004">13.1.6</a>, p. <a href="121-13.1._copy_assign_and_destroy.html#filepos3263004">508</a>).</p>
<p>For example, the <code>string</code> class defines all five copy-control members and the default constructor. If a <code>union</code> contains a <code>string</code> and does not define its own default constructor or one of the copy-control members, then the compiler will synthesize that missing member as deleted. If a class has a <code>union</code> member that has a deleted copy-control member, then that corresponding copy-control operation(s) of the class itself will be deleted as well.</p>
<h4>Using a Class to Manage <code>union</code> Members</h4>
<p>Because of the complexities involved in constructing and destroying members of class type, <code>union</code>s with class-type members ordinarily are embedded inside another class. That way the class can manage the state transitions to and from the member of class type. As an example, we’ll add a <code>string</code> member to our <code>union</code>. We’ll define our <code>union</code> as an anonymous <code>union</code> and make it a member of a class named <code>Token</code>. The <code>Token</code> class will manage the <code>union</code>’s members.</p>
<p>To keep track of what type of value the <code>union</code> holds, we usually define a separate object known as a <strong><a href="186-defined_terms.html#filepos5399553" id="filepos5323244">discriminant</a></strong>. A discriminant lets us discriminate among the values that the <code>union</code> can hold. In order to keep the <code>union</code> and its discriminant in sync, we’ll make the discriminant a member of <code>Token</code> as well. Our class will define a member of an enumeration type (§ <a href="179-19.3._enumerations.html#filepos5202480">19.3</a>, p. <a href="179-19.3._enumerations.html#filepos5202480">832</a>) to keep track of the state of its <code>union</code> member.</p>
<p>The only functions our class will define are the default constructor, the copy-control members, and a set of assignment operators that can assign a value of one of our <code>union</code>’s types to the <code>union</code> member:</p>

```c++
class Token {
public:
    // copy control needed because our class has a union with a string member
    // defining the move constructor and move-assignment operator is left as an exercise
    Token(): tok(INT), ival{0} { }
    Token(const Token &t): tok(t.tok) { copyUnion(t); }
    Token &operator=(const Token&);
    // if the union holds a string, we must destroy it; see § 19.1.2 (p. 824)
    ~Token() { if (tok == STR) sval.~string(); }
    // assignment operators to set the differing members of the union
    Token &operator=(const std::string&);
    Token &operator=(char);
    Token &operator=(int);
    Token &operator=(double);
private:
    enum {INT, CHAR, DBL, STR} tok; // discriminant
    union {                         // anonymous union
        char   cval;
        int    ival;
        double dval;
        std::string sval;
    }; // each Token object has an unnamed member of this unnamed union type
    // check the discriminant and copy the union member as appropriate
    void copyUnion(const Token&);
};
```

<p>Our class defines a nested, unnamed, unscoped enumeration (§ <a href="179-19.3._enumerations.html#filepos5202480">19.3</a>, p. <a href="179-19.3._enumerations.html#filepos5202480">832</a>) that we use as the type for the member named <code>tok</code>. We defined <code>tok</code> following the close curly and before the semicolon that ends the definition of the <code>enum</code>, which defines <code>tok</code> to have this unnamed <code>enum</code> type (§ <a href="026-2.6._defining_our_own_data_structures.html#filepos578460">2.6.1</a>, p. <a href="026-2.6._defining_our_own_data_structures.html#filepos578460">73</a>).</p>
<p>We’ll use <code>tok</code> as our discriminant. When the <code>union</code> holds an <code>int</code> value, <code>tok</code> will have the value <code>INT</code>; if the <code>union</code> has a <code>string</code>, <code>tok</code> will be <code>STR</code>; and so on.</p>
<p>The default constructor initializes the discriminant and the <code>union</code> member to hold an <code>int</code> value of <code>0</code>.</p>
<p>Because our <code>union</code> has a member with a destructor, we must define our own destructor to (conditionally) destroy the <code>string</code> member. Unlike ordinary members of a class type, class members that are part of a <code>union</code> are not automatically destroyed. The destructor has no way to know which type the <code>union</code> holds, so it cannot know which member to destroy.</p>
<p>Our destructor checks whether the object being destroyed holds a <code>string</code>. If so, the destructor explicitly calls the <code>string</code> destructor (§ <a href="177-19.1._controlling_memory_allocation.html#filepos5149502">19.1.2</a>, p. <a href="177-19.1._controlling_memory_allocation.html#filepos5149502">824</a>) to free the memory used by that <code>string</code>. The destructor has no work to do if the <code>union</code> holds a member of any of the built-in types.</p>
<h4>Managing the Discriminant and Destroying the <code>string</code></h4>
<p>The assignment operators will set <code>tok</code> and assign the corresponding member of the <code>union</code>. Like the destructor, these members must conditionally destroy the <code>string</code> before assigning a new value to the <code>union</code>:</p>

```c++
Token &Token::operator=(int i)
{
    if (tok == STR) sval.~string(); // if we have a string, free it
    ival = i;                       // assign to the appropriate member
    tok = INT;                      // update the discriminant
    return *this;
}
```

<p>If the current value in the <code>union</code> is a <code>string</code>, we must destroy that <code>string</code> before assigning a new value to the <code>union</code>. We do so by calling the <code>string</code> destructor. <a id="filepos5333845"></a>Once we’ve cleaned up the <code>string</code> member, we assign the given value to the member that corresponds to the parameter type of the operator. In this case, our parameter is an <code>int</code>, so we assign to <code>ival</code>. We update the discriminant and return.</p>
<p>The <code>double</code> and <code>char</code> assignment operators behave identically to the <code>int</code> version and are left as an exercise. The <code>string</code> version differs from the others because it must manage the transition to and from the <code>string</code> type:</p>

```c++
Token &Token::operator=(const std::string &s)
{
    if (tok == STR) // if we already hold a string, just do an assignment
        sval = s;
    else
        new(&sval) string(s); // otherwise construct a string
    tok = STR;                // update the discriminant
    return *this;
}
```

<p>In this case, if the <code>union</code> already holds a <code>string</code>, we can use the normal <code>string</code> assignment operator to give a new value to that <code>string</code>. Otherwise, there is no existing <code>string</code> object on which to invoke the <code>string</code> assignment operator. Instead, we must construct a <code>string</code> in the memory that holds the <code>union</code>. We do so using placement <code>new</code> (§ <a href="177-19.1._controlling_memory_allocation.html#filepos5149502">19.1.2</a>, p. <a href="177-19.1._controlling_memory_allocation.html#filepos5149502">824</a>) to construct a <code>string</code> at the location in which <code>sval</code> resides. We initialize that <code>string</code> as a copy of our <code>string</code> parameter. We next update the discriminant and return.</p>
<h4>Managing Union Members That Require Copy Control</h4>
<p>Like the type-specific assignment operators, the copy constructor and assignment operators have to test the discriminant to know how to copy the given value. To do this common work, we’ll define a member named <code>copyUnion</code>.</p>
<p>When we call <code>copyUnion</code> from the copy constructor, the <code>union</code> member will have been default-initialized, meaning that the first member of the <code>union</code> will have been initialized. Because our <code>string</code> is not the first member, we know that the <code>union</code> member doesn’t hold a <code>string</code>. In the assignment operator, it is possible that the <code>union</code> already holds a <code>string</code>. We’ll handle that case directly in the assignment operator. That way <code>copyUnion</code> can assume that if its parameter holds a <code>string</code>, <code>copyUnion</code> must construct its own <code>string</code>:</p>

```c++
void Token::copyUnion(const Token &t)
{
    switch (t.tok) {
        case Token::INT: ival = t.ival; break;
        case Token::CHAR: cval = t.cval; break;
        case Token::DBL: dval = t.dval; break;
        // to copy a string, construct it using placement new; see (§ 19.1.2 (p. 824))
        case Token::STR: new(&sval) string(t.sval); break;
    }
}
```

<p>This function uses a <code>switch</code> statement (§ <a href="056-5.3._conditional_statements.html#filepos1278126">5.3.2</a>, p. <a href="056-5.3._conditional_statements.html#filepos1278126">178</a>) to test the discriminant. For <a id="filepos5341005"></a>the built-in types, we assign the value to the corresponding member; if the member we are copying is a <code>string</code>, we construct it.</p>
<p>The assignment operator must handle three possibilities for its <code>string</code> member: Both the left-hand and right-hand operands might be a <code>string</code>; neither operand might be a <code>string</code>; or one but not both operands might be a <code>string</code>:</p>

```c++
Token &Token::operator=(const Token &t)
{
    // if this object holds a string and t doesn't, we have to free the old string
    if (tok == STR && t.tok != STR) sval.~string();
    if (tok == STR && t.tok == STR)
        sval = t.sval;  // no need to construct a new string
    else
        copyUnion(t);   // will construct a string if t.tok is STR
    tok = t.tok;
    return *this;
}
```

<p>If the <code>union</code> in the left-hand operand holds a <code>string</code>, but the <code>union</code> in the right-hand does not, then we have to first free the old <code>string</code> before assigning a new value to the union member. If both <code>union</code>s hold a <code>string</code>, we can use the normal <code>string</code> assignment operator to do the copy. Otherwise, we call <code>copyUnion</code> to do the assignment. Inside <code>copyUnion</code>, if the right-hand operand is a <code>string</code>, we’ll construct a new <code>string</code> in the <code>union</code> member of the left-hand operand. If neither operand is a <code>string</code>, then ordinary assignment will suffice.</p>

::: info
<p>Exercises Section 19.6</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 19.21:</strong> Write your own version of the <code>Token</code> class.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 19.22:</strong> Add a member of type <code>Sales_data</code> to your <code>Token</code> class.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 19.23:</strong> Add a move constructor and move assignment to <code>Token</code>.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 19.24:</strong> Explain what happens if we assign a <code>Token</code> object to itself.</p>
<p><strong>Exercise 19.25:</strong> Write assignment operators that take values of each type in the <code>union</code>.</p>
:::
