---
title: A.2. A Brief Tour of the Algorithms
---

<h3 id="filepos5414819">A.2. A Brief Tour of the Algorithms</h3>
<p>The library defines more than 100 algorithms. Learning to use these algorithms effectively requires understanding their structure rather than memorizing the details of each algorithm. Accordingly, in <a href="097-chapter_10._generic_algorithms.html#filepos2454824">Chapter 10</a> we concentrated on describing and understanding that architecture. In this section we’ll briefly describe every algorithm. In the following descriptions,</p>
<ul><li><code>beg</code> and <code>end</code> are iterators that denote a range of elements (§ <a href="090-9.2._container_library_overview.html#filepos2196283">9.2.1</a>, p. <a href="090-9.2._container_library_overview.html#filepos2196283">331</a>). Almost all of the algorithms operate on a sequence denoted by <code>beg</code> and <code>end</code>.</li><li><code>beg2</code> is an iterator denoting the beginning of a second input sequence. If present, <code>end2</code> denotes the end of the second sequence. When there is no <code>end2</code>, the sequence denoted by <code>beg2</code> is assumed to be as large as the input sequence denoted by <code>beg</code> and <code>end</code>. The types of <code>beg</code> and <code>beg2</code> need not match. However, it must be possible to apply the specified operation or given callable object to elements in the two sequences.</li><li><code>dest</code> is an iterator denoting a destination. The destination sequence must be able to hold as many elements as necessary given the input sequence.</li><li><code>unaryPred</code> and <code>binaryPred</code> are unary and binary predicates (§ <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2520495">10.3.1</a>, p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2520495">386</a>) that return a type that can be used as a condition and take one and two arguments, respectively, that are elements in the input range.</li><li><a id="filepos5417816"></a><code>comp</code> is a binary predicate that meets the ordering requirements for key in an associative container (§ <a href="108-11.2._overview_of_the_associative_containers.html#filepos2751456">11.2.2</a>, p. <a href="108-11.2._overview_of_the_associative_containers.html#filepos2751456">425</a>).</li><li><code>unaryOp</code> and <code>binaryOp</code> are callable objects (§ <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">10.3.2</a>, p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">388</a>) that can be called with one and two arguments from the input range, respectively.</li></ul>

<h4 id="filepos5418543">A.2.1. Algorithms to Find an Object</h4>
<p>These algorithms search an input range for a specific value or sequence of values.</p>
<p>Each algorithm provides two overloaded versions. The first version uses equality (<code>==</code>) operator of the underlying type to compare elements; the second version compares elements using the user-supplied <code>unaryPred</code> or <code>binaryPred</code>.</p>
<h5>Simple Find Algorithms</h5>
<p>These algorithms look for specific values and require <em><strong>input iterators</strong></em>.</p>

```c++
find(beg, end, val)
find_if(beg, end, unaryPred)
find_if_not(beg, end, unaryPred)
count(beg, end, val)
count_if(beg, end, unaryPred)
```

<p><code>find</code> returns an iterator to the first element in the input range equal to <code>val</code>. <code>find_if</code> returns an iterator to the first element for which <code>unaryPred</code> succeeds; <code>find_if_not</code> returns an iterator to the first element for which <code>unaryPred</code> is <code>false</code>. All three return <code>end</code> if no such element exists.</p>
<p><code>count</code> returns a count of how many times <code>val</code> occurs; <code>count_if</code> counts elements for which <code>unaryPred</code> succeeds.</p>

```c++
all_of(beg, end, unaryPred)
any_of(beg, end, unaryPred)
none_of(beg, end, unaryPred)
```

<p>Returns a <code>bool</code> indicating whether the <code>unaryPred</code> succeeded for all of the elements, any element, or no element respectively. If the sequence is empty, <code>any_of</code> returns <code>false</code>; <code>all_of</code> and <code>none_of</code> return <code>true</code>.</p>
<h5>Algorithms to Find One of Many Values</h5>
<p>These algorithms require <em><strong>forward iterators</strong></em>. They look for a repeated elements in the input sequence.</p>

```c++
adjacent_find(beg, end)
adjacent_find(beg, end, binaryPred)
```

<p>Returns an iterator to the first adjacent pair of duplicate elements. Returns <code>end</code> if there are no adjacent duplicate elements.</p>

```c++
search_n(beg, end, count, val)
search_n(beg, end, count, val, binaryPred)
```

<p>Returns an iterator to the beginning of a subsequence of <code>count</code> equal elements. Returns <code>end</code> if no such subsequence exists.</p>
<h5><a id="filepos5424713"></a>Algorithms to Find Subsequences</h5>
<p>With the exception of <code>find_first_of</code>, these algorithms require two pairs of <em><strong>forward iterators</strong></em>. <code>find_first_of</code> uses <em><strong>input iterators</strong></em> to denote its first sequence and <em><strong>forward iterators</strong></em> for its second. These algorithms search for subsequences rather than for a single element.</p>

```c++
search(beg1, end1, beg2, end2)
search(beg1, end1, beg2, end2, binaryPred)
```

<p>Returns an iterator to the first position in the input range at which the second range occurs as a subsequence. Returns <code>end1</code> if the subsequence is not found.</p>

```c++
find_first_of(beg1, end1, beg2, end2)
find_first_of(beg1, end1, beg2, end2, binaryPred)
```

<p>Returns an iterator to the first occurrence in the first range of any element from the second range. Returns <code>end1</code> if no match is found.</p>

```c++
find_end(beg1, end1, beg2, end2)
find_end(beg1, end1, beg2, end2, binaryPred)
```

<p>Like <code>search</code>, but returns an iterator to the last position in the input range at which the second range occurs as a subsequence. Returns <code>end1</code> if the second subsequence is empty or is not found.</p>
<h4 id="filepos5427759">A.2.2. Other Read-Only Algorithms</h4>
<p>These algorithms require <em><strong>input iterators</strong></em> for their first two arguments.</p>
<p>The <code>equal</code> and <code>mismatch</code> algorithms also take an additional <em><strong>input iterator</strong></em> that denotes the start of a second range. They also provide two overloaded versions. The first version uses equality (<code>==</code>) operator of the underlying type to compare elements; the second version compares elements using the user-supplied <code>unaryPred</code> or <code>binaryPred</code>.</p>

```c++
for_each(beg, end, unaryOp)
```

<p>Applies the callable object (§ <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">10.3.2</a>, p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">388</a>) <code>unaryOp</code> to each element in its input range. The return value from <code>unaryOp</code> (if any) is ignored. If the iterators allow writing to elements through the dereference operator, then <code>unaryOp</code> may modify the elements.</p>

```c++
mismatch(beg1, end1, beg2)
mismatch(beg1, end1, beg2, binaryPred)
```

<p>Compares the elements in two sequences. Returns a <code>pair</code> (§ <a href="108-11.2._overview_of_the_associative_containers.html#filepos2764131">11.2.3</a>, p. <a href="108-11.2._overview_of_the_associative_containers.html#filepos2764131">426</a>) of iterators denoting the first elements in each sequence that do not match. If all the elements match, then the <code>pair</code> returned is <code>end1</code>, and an iterator into <code>beg2</code> offset by the size of the first sequence.</p>

```c++
equal(beg1, end1, beg2)
equal(beg1, end1, beg2, binaryPred)
```

<p>Determines whether two sequences are equal. Returns <code>true</code> if each element in the input range equals the corresponding element in the sequence that begins at <code>beg2</code>.</p>
<h4 id="filepos5431685"><a id="filepos5431718"></a>A.2.3. Binary Search Algorithms</h4>
<p>These algorithms require <em><strong>forward iterators</strong></em> but are optimized so that they execute much more quickly if they are called with <em><strong>random-access iterators</strong></em>. Technically speaking, regardless of the iterator type, these algorithms execute a logarithmic number of comparisons. However, when used with forward iterators, they must make a linear number of iterator operations to move among the elements in the sequence.</p>
<p>These algorithms require that the elements in the input sequence are already in order. These algorithms behave similarly to the associative container members of the same name (§ <a href="109-11.3._operations_on_associative_containers.html#filepos2829910">11.3.5</a>, p. <a href="109-11.3._operations_on_associative_containers.html#filepos2829910">438</a>). The <code>equal_range</code>, <code>lower_bound</code>, and <code>upper_bound</code> algorithms return iterators that refer to positions in the sequence at which the given element can be inserted while still preserving the sequence’s ordering. If the element is larger than any other in the sequence, then the iterator that is returned might be the off-the-end iterator.</p>
<p>Each algorithm provides two versions: The first uses the element type’s less-than operator (<code>&lt;</code>) to test elements; the second uses the given comparison operation. In the following algorithms, “<code>x</code> is less than <code>y</code>” means <code>x &lt; y</code> or that <code>comp(x, y)</code> succeeds.</p>

```c++
lower_bound(beg, end, val)
lower_bound(beg, end, val, comp)
```

<p>Returns an iterator denoting the first element such that <code>val</code> is not less than that element, or <code>end</code> if no such element exists.</p>

```c++
upper_bound(beg, end, val)
upper_bound(beg, end, val, comp)
```

<p>Returns an iterator denoting the first element such that is <code>val</code> is less than that element, or <code>end</code> if no such element exists.</p>

```c++
equal_range(beg, end, val)
equal_range(beg, end, val, comp)
```

<p>Returns a <code>pair</code> (§ <a href="108-11.2._overview_of_the_associative_containers.html#filepos2764131">11.2.3</a>, p. <a href="108-11.2._overview_of_the_associative_containers.html#filepos2764131">426</a>) in which the <code>first</code> member is the iterator that would be returned by <code>lower_bound</code>, and <code>second</code> is the iterator <code>upper_bound</code> would return.</p>

```c++
binary_search(beg, end, val)
binary_search(beg, end, val, comp)
```

<p>Returns a <code>bool</code> indicating whether the sequence contains an element that is equal to <code>val</code>. Two values <code>x</code> and <code>y</code> are considered equal if <code>x</code> is not less than <code>y</code> and <code>y</code> is not less than <code>x</code>.</p>
<h4 id="filepos5437730">A.2.4. Algorithms That Write Container Elements</h4>
<p>Many algorithms write new values to the elements in the given sequence. These algorithms can be distinguished from one another both by the kinds of iterators they use to denote their input sequence and by whether they write elements in the input range or write to a given destination.</p>
<h5><a id="filepos5438223"></a>Algorithms That Write but Do Not Read Elements</h5>
<p>These algorithms require an <em><strong>output iterator</strong></em> that denotes a destination. The <code>_n</code> versions take a second argument that specifies a count and write the given number of elements to the destination.</p>

```c++
fill(beg, end, val)
fill_n(dest, cnt, val)
generate(beg, end, Gen)
generate_n(dest, cnt, Gen)
```

<p>Assigns a new value to each element in the input sequence. <code>fill</code> assigns the value <code>val</code>; <code>generate</code> executes the generator object <code>Gen()</code>. A generator is a callable object (§ <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">10.3.2</a>, p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2530282">388</a>) that is expected to produce a different return value each time it is called. <code>fill</code> and <code>generate</code> return <code>void</code>. The <code>_n</code> versions return an iterator that refers to the position immediately following the last element written to the output sequence.</p>
<h5>Write Algorithms with Input Iterators</h5>
<p>Each of these algorithms reads an input sequence and writes to an output sequence. They require <code>dest</code> to be an <em><strong>output iterator</strong></em>, and the iterators denoting the input range must be <em><strong>input iterators</strong></em>.</p>

```c++
copy(beg, end, dest)
copy_if(beg, end, dest, unaryPred)
copy_n(beg, n, dest)
```

<p>Copies from the input range to the sequence denoted by <code>dest</code>. <code>copy</code> copies all elements, <code>copy_if</code> copies those for which <code>unaryPred</code> succeeds, and <code>copy_n</code> copies the first <code>n</code> elements. The input sequence must have at least <code>n</code> elements.</p>

```c++
move(beg, end, dest)
```

<p>Calls <code>std::move</code> (§ <a href="126-13.6._moving_objects.html#filepos3429349">13.6.1</a>, p. <a href="126-13.6._moving_objects.html#filepos3429349">533</a>) on each element in the input sequence to move that element to the sequence beginning at iterator <code>dest</code>.</p>

```c++
transform(beg, end, dest, unaryOp)
transform(beg, end, beg2, dest, binaryOp)
```

<p>Calls the given operation and writes the result of that operation to <code>dest</code>. The first version applies a unary operation to each element in the input range. The second applies a binary operation to elements from the two input sequences.</p>

```c++
replace_copy(beg, end, dest, old_val, new_val)
replace_copy_if(beg, end, dest, unaryPred, new_val)
```

<p>Copies each element to <code>dest</code>, replacing the specified elements with <code>new_val</code>. The first version replaces those elements that are <code>== old_val</code>. The second version replaces those elements for which <code>unaryPred</code> succeeds.</p>

```c++
merge(beg1, end1, beg2, end2, dest)
merge(beg1, end1, beg2, end2, dest, comp)
```

<p>Both input sequences must be sorted. Writes a merged sequence to <code>dest</code>. The first version compares elements using the <code>&lt;</code> operator; the second version uses the given comparison operation.</p>
<h5><a id="filepos5445574"></a>Write Algorithms with Forward Iterators</h5>
<p>These algorithms require <em><strong>forward iterators</strong></em> because they write to elements in their input sequence. The iterators must give write access to the elements.</p>

```c++
iter_swap(iter1, iter2)
swap_ranges(beg1, end1, beg2)
```

<p>Swaps the element denoted by <code>iter1</code> with the one denoted by <code>iter2</code>; or swaps all of the elements in the input range with those in the second sequence beginning at <code>beg2</code>. The ranges must not overlap. <code>iter_swap</code> returns <code>void</code>; <code>swap_ranges</code> returns <code>beg2</code> incremented to denote the element just after the last one swapped.</p>

```c++
replace(beg, end, old_val, new_val)
replace_if(beg, end, unaryPred, new_val)
```

<p>Replaces each matching element with <code>new_val</code>. The first version uses <code>==</code> to compare elements with <code>old_val</code>; the second version replaces those elements for which <code>unaryPred</code> succeeds.</p>
<h5>Write Algorithms with Bidirectional Iterators</h5>
<p>These algorithms require the ability to go backward in the sequence, so they require <em><strong>bidirectional iterators</strong></em>.</p>

```c++
copy_backward(beg, end, dest)
move_backward(beg, end, dest)
```

<p>Copies or moves elements from the input range to the given destination. Unlike other algorithms, <code>dest</code> is the off-the-end iterator for the output sequence (i.e., the destination sequence will end immediately <em>before</em>
<code>dest</code>). The last element in the input range is copied or moved to the last element in the destination, then the second-to-last element is copied/moved, and so on. Elements in the destination have the same order as those in the input range. If the range is empty, the return value is <code>dest</code>; otherwise, the return denotes the element that was copied or moved from <code>*beg</code>.</p>

```c++
inplace_merge(beg, mid, end)
inplace_merge(beg, mid, end, comp)
```

<p>Merges two sorted subsequences from the same sequence into a single, ordered sequence. The subsequences from <code>beg</code> to <code>mid</code> and from <code>mid</code> to <code>end</code> are merged and written back into the original sequence. The first version uses <code>&lt;</code> to compare elements; the second version uses a given comparison operation. Returns <code>void</code>.</p>
<h4 id="filepos5451118">A.2.5. Partitioning and Sorting Algorithms</h4>
<p>The sorting and partitioning algorithms provide various strategies for ordering the elements of a sequence.</p>
<p>Each of the sorting and partitioning algorithms provides stable and unstable versions (§ <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2520495">10.3.1</a>, p. <a href="100-10.3._customizing_operations.html#filepos2520495">387</a>). A stable algorithm maintains the relative order of equal elements. The stable algorithms do more work and so may run more slowly and use more memory than the unstable counterparts.</p>
<h5><a id="filepos5451841"></a>Partitioning Algorithms</h5>
<p>A <code>partition</code> divides elements in the input range into two groups. The first group consists of those elements that satisfy the specified predicate; the second, those that do not. For example, we can partition elements in a sequence based on whether the elements are odd, or on whether a word begins with a capital letter, and so forth. These algorithms require <em><strong>bidirectional iterators</strong></em>.</p>

```c++
is_partitioned(beg, end, unaryPred)
```

<p>Returns <code>true</code> if all the elements for which <code>unaryPred</code> succeeds precede those for which <code>unaryPred</code> is <code>false</code>. Alsoreturns <code>true</code> if the sequence is empty.</p>

```c++
partition_copy(beg, end, dest1, dest2, unaryPred)
```

<p>Copies elements for which <code>unaryPred</code> succeeds to <code>dest1</code> and copies those for which <code>unaryPred</code> fails to <code>dest2</code>. Returns a <code>pair</code> (§ <a href="108-11.2._overview_of_the_associative_containers.html#filepos2764131">11.2.3</a>, p. <a href="108-11.2._overview_of_the_associative_containers.html#filepos2764131">426</a>) of iterators. The <code>first</code> member denotes the end of the elements copied to <code>dest1</code>, and the <code>second</code> denotes the end of the elements copied to <code>dest2</code>. The input sequence may not overlap either of the destination sequences.</p>

```c++
partition_point(beg, end, unaryPred)
```

<p>The input sequence must be partitioned by <code>unaryPred</code>. Returns an iterator one past the subrange for which <code>unaryPred</code> succeeds. If the returned iterator is not <code>end</code>, then <code>unaryPred</code> must be <code>false</code> for the returned iterator and for all elements that follow that point.</p>

```c++
stable_partition(beg, end, unaryPred)
partition(beg, end, unaryPred)
```

<p>Uses <code>unaryPred</code> to partition the input sequence. Elements for which <code>unaryPred</code> succeeds are put at the beginning of the sequence; those for which the predicate is <code>false</code> are at the end. Returns an iterator just past the last element for which <code>unaryPred</code> succeeds, or <code>beg</code> if there are no such elements.</p>
<h5>Sorting Algorithms</h5>
<p>These algorithms require <em><strong>random-access iterators</strong></em>. Each of the sorting algorithms provides two overloaded versions. One version uses the element’s operator <code>&lt;</code> to compare elements; the other takes an extra parameter that specifies an ordering relation (§ <a href="108-11.2._overview_of_the_associative_containers.html#filepos2751456">11.2.2</a>, p. <a href="108-11.2._overview_of_the_associative_containers.html#filepos2751456">425</a>). <code>partial_sort_copy</code> returns an iterator into the destination; the other sorting algorithms return <code>void</code>.</p>
<p>The <code>partial_sort</code> and <code>nth_element</code> algorithms do only part of the job of sorting the sequence. They are often used to solve problems that might otherwise be handled by sorting the entire sequence. Because these algorithms do less work, they typically are faster than sorting the entire input range.</p>

```c++
sort(beg, end)
stable_sort(beg, end)
sort(beg, end, comp)
stable_sort(beg, end, comp)
```

<p>Sorts the entire range.</p>
<p><a id="filepos5459072"></a></p>

```c++
is_sorted(beg, end)
is_sorted(beg, end, comp)
is_sorted_until(beg, end)
is_sorted_until(beg, end, comp)
```

<p><code>is_sorted</code> returns a <code>bool</code> indicating whether the entire input sequence is sorted. <code>is_sorted_until</code> finds the longest initial sorted subsequence in the input and returns an iterator just after the last element of that subsequence.</p>

```c++
partial_sort(beg, mid, end)
partial_sort(beg, mid, end, comp)
```

<p>Sorts a number of elements equal to <code>mid</code> – <code>beg</code>. That is, if <code>mid</code> – <code>beg</code> is equal to 42, then this function puts the lowest-valued elements in sorted order in the first 42 positions in the sequence. After <code>partial_sort</code> completes, the elements in the range from <code>beg</code> up to but not including <code>mid</code> are sorted. No element in the sorted range is larger than any element in the range after <code>mid</code>. The order among the unsorted elements is unspecified.</p>

```c++
partial_sort_copy(beg, end, destBeg, destEnd)
partial_sort_copy(beg, end, destBeg, destEnd, comp)
```

<p>Sorts elements from the input range and puts as much of the sorted sequence as fits into the sequence denoted by the iterators <code>destBeg</code> and <code>destEnd</code>. If the destination range is the same size or has more elements than the input range, then the entire input range is sorted and stored starting at <code>destBeg</code>. If the destination size is smaller, then only as many sorted elements as will fit are copied.</p>
<p>Returns an iterator into the destination that refers just past the last element that was sorted. The returned iterator will be <code>destEnd</code> if that destination sequence is smaller than or equal in size to the input range.</p>

```c++
nth_element(beg, nth, end)
nth_element(beg, nth, end, comp)
```

<p>The argument <code>nth</code> must be an iterator positioned on an element in the input sequence. After <code>nth_element</code>, the element denoted by that iterator has the value that would be there if the entire sequence were sorted. The elements in the sequence are partitioned around <code>nth</code>: Those before <code>nth</code> are all smaller than or equal to the value denoted by <code>nth</code>, and the ones after it are greater than or equal to it.</p>
<h4 id="filepos5464459">A.2.6. General Reordering Operations</h4>
<p>Several algorithms reorder the elements of the input sequence. The first two, <code>remove</code> and <code>unique</code>, reorder the sequence so that the elements in the first part of the sequence meet some criteria. They return an iterator marking the end of this subsequence. Others, such as <code>reverse</code>, <code>rotate</code>, and <code>random_shuffle</code>, rearrange the entire sequence.</p>
<p>The base versions of these algorithms operate “in place”; they rearrange the elements in the input sequence itself. Three of the reordering algorithms offer “copying” versions. These <code>_copy</code> versions perform the same reordering but write the reordered elements to a specified destination sequence rather than changing the input sequence. These algorithms require <em><strong>output iterator</strong></em> for the destination.</p>
<h5><a id="filepos5465884"></a>Reordering Algorithms Using Forward Iterators</h5>
<p>These algorithms reorder the input sequence. They require that the iterators be at least <em><strong>forward iterators</strong></em>.</p>

```c++
remove(beg, end, val)
remove_if(beg, end, unaryPred)
remove_copy(beg, end, dest, val)
remove_copy_if(beg, end, dest, unaryPred)
```

<p>“Removes” elements from the sequence by overwriting them with elements that are to be kept. The removed elements are those that are <code>== val</code> or for which <code>unaryPred</code> succeeds. Returns an iterator just past the last element that was not removed.</p>

```c++
unique(beg, end)
unique(beg, end, binaryPred)
unique_copy(beg, end, dest)
unique_copy_if(beg, end, dest, binaryPred)
```

<p>Reorders the sequence so that adjacent duplicate elements are “removed” by overwriting them. Returns an iterator just past the last unique element. The first version uses <code>==</code> to determine whether two elements are the same; the second version uses the predicate to test adjacent elements.</p>

```c++
rotate(beg, mid, end)
rotate_copy(beg, mid, end, dest)
```

<p>Rotates the elements around the element denoted by <code>mid</code>. The element at <code>mid</code> becomes the first element; elements from <code>mid + 1</code> up to but not including <code>end</code> come next, followed by the range from <code>beg</code> up to but not including <code>mid</code>. Returns an iterator denoting the element that was originally at <code>beg</code>.</p>
<h5>Reordering Algorithms Using Bidirectional Iterators</h5>
<p>Because these algorithms process the input sequence backward, they require <em><strong>bidirectional iterators</strong></em>.</p>

```c++
reverse(beg, end)
reverse_copy(beg, end, dest)
```

<p>Reverses the elements in the sequence. <code>reverse</code> returns <code>void</code>; <code>reverse_copy</code> returns an iterator just past the element copied to the destination.</p>
<h5>Reordering Algorithms Using Random-Access Iterators</h5>
<p>Because these algorithms rearrange the elements in a random order, they require <em><strong>random-access iterators</strong></em>.</p>

```c++
random_shuffle(beg, end)
random_shuffle(beg, end, rand)
shuffle(beg, end, Uniform_rand)
```

<p>Shuffles the elements in the input sequence. The second version takes a callable that must take a positive integer value and produce a uniformly distributed random integer in the exclusive range from 0 to the given value. The third argument <a id="filepos5472017"></a>to <code>shuffle</code> must meet the requirements of a uniform random number generator (§ <a href="166-17.4._random_numbers.html#filepos4713529">17.4</a>, p. <a href="166-17.4._random_numbers.html#filepos4713529">745</a>). All three versions return <code>void</code>.</p>
<h4 id="filepos5472363">A.2.7. Permutation Algorithms</h4>
<p>The permutation algorithms generate lexicographical permutations of a sequence. These algorithms reorder a permutation to produce the (lexicographically) next or previous permutation of the given sequence. They return a <code>bool</code> that indicates whether there was a next or previous permutation.</p>
<p>To understand what is meant by next or previous permutaion, consider the following sequence of three characters: <code>abc</code>. There are six possible permutations on this sequence: <code>abc</code>, <code>acb</code>, <code>bac</code>, <code>bca</code>, <code>cab</code>, and <code>cba</code>. These permutations are listed in lexicographical order based on the less-than operator. That is, <code>abc</code> is the first permutation because its first element is less than or equal to the first element in every other permutation, and its second element is smaller than any permutation sharing the same first element. Similarly, <code>acb</code> is the next permutation because it begins with <code>a</code>, which is smaller than the first element in any remaining permutation. Permutations that begin with <code>b</code> come before those that begin with <code>c</code>.</p>
<p>For any given permutation, we can say which permutation comes before it and which after it, assuming a particular ordering between individual elements. Given the permutation <code>bca</code>, we can say that its previous permutation is <code>bac</code> and that its next permutation is <code>cab</code>. There is no previous permutation of the sequence <code>abc</code>, nor is there a next permutation of <code>cba</code>.</p>
<p>These algorithms assume that the elements in the sequence are unique. That is, the algorithms assume that no two elements in the sequence have the same value.</p>
<p>To produce the permutation, the sequence must be processed both forward and backward, thus requiring <em><strong>bidirectional iterators</strong></em>.</p>

```c++
is_permutation(beg1, end1, beg2)
is_permutation(beg1, end1, beg2, binaryPred)
```

<p>Returns <code>true</code> if there is a permutation of the second sequence with the same number of elements as are in the first sequence and for which the elements in the permutation and in the input sequence are equal. The first version compares elements using <code>==</code>; the second uses the given <code>binaryPred</code>.</p>

```c++
next_permutation(beg, end)
next_permutation(beg, end, comp)
```

<p>If the sequence is already in its last permutation, then <code>next_permutation</code> reorders the sequence to be the lowest permutation and returns <code>false</code>. Otherwise, it transforms the input sequence into the lexicographically next ordered sequence, and returns <code>true</code>. The first version uses the element’s <code>&lt;</code> operator to compare elements; the second version uses the given comparison operation.</p>

```c++
prev_permutation(beg, end)
prev_permutation(beg, end, comp)
```

<p>Like <code>next_permutation</code>, but transforms the sequence to form the previous permutation. If this is the smallest permutation, then it reorders the sequence to be the largest permutation and returns <code>false</code>.</p>
<h4 id="filepos5478694"><a id="filepos5478727"></a>A.2.8. Set Algorithms for Sorted Sequences</h4>
<p>The set algorithms implement general set operations on a sequence that is in sorted order. These algorithms are distinct from the library <code>set</code> container and should not be confused with operations on <code>set</code>s. Instead, these algorithms provide setlike behavior on an ordinary sequential container (<code>vector</code>, <code>list</code>, etc.) or other sequence, such as an input stream.</p>
<p>These algorithms process elements sequentially, requiring <em><strong>input iterators</strong></em>. With the exception of <code>includes</code>, they also take an <em><strong>output iterator</strong></em> denoting a destination. These algorithms return their <code>dest</code> iterator incremented to denote the element just after the last one that was written to <code>dest</code>.</p>
<p>Each algorithm is overloaded. The first version uses the <code>&lt;</code> operator for the element type. The second uses a given comparison operation.</p>

```c++
includes(beg, end, beg2, end2)
includes(beg, end, beg2, end2, comp)
```

<p>Returns <code>true</code> if every element in the second sequence is contained in the input sequence. Returns <code>false</code> otherwise.</p>

```c++
set_union(beg, end, beg2, end2, dest)
set_union(beg, end, beg2, end2, dest, comp)
```

<p>Creates a sorted sequence of the elements that are in either sequence. Elements that are in both sequences occur in the output sequence only once. Stores the sequence in <code>dest</code>.</p>

```c++
set_intersection(beg, end, beg2, end2, dest)
set_intersection(beg, end, beg2, end2, dest, comp)
```

<p>Creates a sorted sequence of elements present in both sequences. Stores the sequence in <code>dest</code>.</p>

```c++
set_difference(beg, end, beg2, end2, dest)
set_difference(beg, end, beg2, end2, dest, comp)
```

<p>Creates a sorted sequence of elements present in the first sequence but not in the second.</p>

```c++
set_symmetric_difference(beg, end, beg2, end2, dest)
set_symmetric_difference(beg, end, beg2, end2, dest, comp)
```

<p>Creates a sorted sequence of elements present in either sequence but not in both.</p>
<h4 id="filepos5484033">A.2.9. Minimum and Maximum Values</h4>
<p>These algorithms use either the <code>&lt;</code> operator for the element type or the given comparison operation. The algorithms in the first group operate on values rather than sequences. The algorithms in the second set take a sequence that is denoted by <em><strong>input iterators</strong></em>.</p>

```c++
min(val1, val2)
min(val1, val2, comp)
min(init_list)
min(init_list, comp)
```

```c++
max(val1, val2)
max(val1, val2, comp)
max(init_list)
max(init_list, comp)
```

<p>Returns the minimum/maximum of <code>val1</code> and <code>val2</code> or the minimum/maximum value in the <code>initializer_list</code>. The arguments must have exactly the same type as each other. Arguments and the return type are both references to <code>const</code>, meaning that objects are not copied.</p>

```c++
minmax(val1, val2)
minmax(val1, val2, comp)
minmax(init_list)
minmax(init_list, comp)
```

<p>Returns a <code>pair</code> (§ <a href="108-11.2._overview_of_the_associative_containers.html#filepos2764131">11.2.3</a>, p. <a href="108-11.2._overview_of_the_associative_containers.html#filepos2764131">426</a>) where the <code>first</code> member is the smaller of the supplied values and the <code>second</code> is the larger. The <code>initializer_list</code> version returns a <code>pair</code> in which the <code>first</code> member is the smallest value in the list and the <code>second</code> member is the largest.</p>

```c++
min_element(beg, end)
min_element(beg, end, comp)
max_element(beg, end)
max_element(beg, end, comp)
minmax_element(beg, end)
minmax_element(beg, end, comp)
```

<p><code>min_element</code> and <code>max_element</code> return iterators referring to the smallest and largest element in the input sequence, respectively. <code>minmax_element</code> returns a <code>pair</code> whose <code>first</code> member is the smallest element and whose <code>second</code> member is the largest.</p>
<h5>Lexicographical Comparison</h5>
<p>This algorithm compares two sequences based on the first unequal pair of elements. Uses either the <code>&lt;</code> operator for the element type or the given comparison operation. Both sequences are denoted by <em><strong>input iterators</strong></em>.</p>

```c++
lexicographical_compare(beg1, end1, beg2, end2)
lexicographical_compare(beg1, end1, beg2, end2, comp)
```

<p>Returns <code>true</code> if the first sequence is lexicographically less than the second. Otherwise, returns <code>false</code>. If one sequence is shorter than the other and all its elements match the corresponding elements in the longer sequence, then the shorter sequence is lexicographically smaller. If the sequences are the same size and the corresponding elements match, then neither is lexicographically less than the other.</p>
<h4 id="filepos5490698">A.2.10. Numeric Algorithms</h4>
<p>The numeric algorithms are defined in the <code>numeric</code> header. These algorithms require <em><strong>input iterators</strong></em>; if the algorithm writes output, it uses an <em><strong>output iterator</strong></em> for the destination.</p>
<p><a id="filepos5491189"></a></p>

```c++
accumulate(beg, end, init)
accumulate(beg, end, init, binaryOp)
```

<p>Returns the sum of all the values in the input range. The summation starts with the initial value specified by <code>init</code>. The return type is the same type as the type of <code>init</code>. The first version applies the <code>+</code> operator for the element type; the second version applies the specified binary operation.</p>

```c++
inner_product(beg1, end1, beg2, init)
inner_product(beg1, end1, beg2, init, binOp1, binOp2)
```

<p>Returns the sum of the elements generated as the product of two sequences. The two sequences are processed in tandem, and the elements from each sequence are multiplied. The product of that multiplication is summed. The initial value of the sum is specified by <code>init</code>. The type of <code>init</code> determines the return type.</p>
<p>The first version uses the element’s multiplication (<code>*</code>) and addition (<code>+</code>) operators. The second version applies the specified binary operations, using the first operation in place of addition and the second in place of multiplication.</p>

```c++
partial_sum(beg, end, dest)
partial_sum(beg, end, dest, binaryOp)
```

<p>Writes a new sequence to <code>dest</code> in which the value of each new element represents the sum of all the previous elements up to and including its position within the input range. The first version uses the <code>+</code> operator for the element type; the second version applies the specified binary operation. Returns the <code>dest</code> iterator incremented to refer just past the last element written.</p>

```c++
adjacent_difference(beg, end, dest)
adjacent_difference(beg, end, dest, binaryOp)
```

<p>Writes a new sequence to <code>dest</code> in which the value of each new element other than the first represents the difference between the current and previous elements. The first version uses the element type’s <code>-</code> operation; the second version applies the specified binary operation.</p>

```c++
iota(beg, end, val)
```

<p>Assigns <code>val</code> to the first element and increments <code>val</code>. Assigns the incremented value to the next element, and again increments <code>val</code>, and assigns the incremented value to the next element in the sequence. Continues incrementing <code>val</code> and assigning its new value to successive elements in the input sequence.</p>
